Health, Government of Alberta | Health 2023 –2024 Annual Report

©2024 Government of Alberta | Published: June 2024
ISBN 978-1-4601-6013-8
ISSN 2367-9824

Note to Readers: Copies of the annual report are available on the Alberta Open Government Portal
website www.alberta.ca




ii                                                                     Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
Table of Contents

Preface ........................................................................................................................................................ 3

Minister’s Accountability Statement .............................................................................................. 4

Message from the Minister ................................................................................................................. 5

Management’s Responsibility for Reporting .............................................................................. 7

Results Analysis ..................................................................................................................................... 9
      Ministry Overview ......................................................................................................................................... 10
      Discussion and Analysis of Results .................................................................................................... 19
      Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology ..................................................................... 55

Financial Information ......................................................................................................................... 62
      Reporting Entity and Method Consolidation ................................................................................... 63
      Ministry Financial Highlights ................................................................................................................... 64
      Supplemental Financial Information ................................................................................................... 70
      Financial Statements of Other Reporting Entities ........................................................................ 72
      Other Financial Information ...................................................................................................................151

Annual Report Extracts and Other Statutory Reports....................................................... 160




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                                                                       1
Introduction




2              Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                           Introduction




Preface

The Public Accounts of Alberta are prepared in accordance with the Financial Administration Act
and the Sustainable Fiscal Planning and Reporting Act. The Public Accounts consist of the annual
report of the Government of Alberta and the annual reports of each ministry.

The 2023-24 Annual Report reflects the 2023-26 Ministry Business Plans, the Government of
Alberta Strategic Plan, as well as the ministry’s activities and accomplishments during the 2023-24
fiscal year, which ended on March 31, 2024.

The Annual Report of the Government of Alberta contains Budget 2023 Key Results, the audited
Consolidated Financial Statements and Performance Results, which compares actual performance
results to desired results set out in the government’s strategic plan.

This annual report of the Ministry of Health contains the Minister’s Accountability Statement, the
ministry’s Financial Information and Results Analysis, a comparison of actual performance results
to desired results set out in the Ministry Business Plan. This ministry annual report also includes:

   the financial statements of entities making up the ministry including Alberta Health Services
    and the Health Quality Council of Alberta, for which the minister is responsible; and
   other financial information as required by the Financial Administration Act and Sustainable
    Fiscal Planning and Reporting Act, as separate reports, to the extent that the ministry has
    anything to report.


All Ministry Annual Reports should be considered along with the Government of Alberta Annual
Report to provide a complete overview of government’s commitment to openness, accountability,
and fiscal transparency.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                       3
Introduction




Minister’s Accountability Statement

The ministry’s annual report for the year ended March 31, 2024, was prepared under my direction
in accordance with the Sustainable Fiscal Planning and Reporting Act and the government’s
accounting policies. All the government’s policy decisions as at June 5, 2024 with material economic
or fiscal implications of which I am aware have been considered in the preparation of this report.



[Original signed by]

Honourable Adriana LaGrange
Minister of Health




4                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                            Introduction




Message from the Minister

                                   Albertans deserve reliable, accessible health care when and where
                                   they need it, and in 2023-24, our government launched an
                                   ambitious plan to refocus Alberta’s health care system. Our
                                   refocusing initiative will prioritize acute care, primary care,
                                   assisted living, and mental health and addiction to improve patient
                                   outcomes, empower health care professionals and improve
                                   transparency and oversight.

                                The 2023-24 Alberta Health Annual Report highlights the
                                significant work that has taken place over the past year to support
                                the health care system across the province. Through Budget 2023,
                                our government invested more than $24.5 billion to improve the
                                delivery of health care services and advance the Health Care Action
                                Plan. These funds were allocated across the health care system to
boost access to surgeries, improve emergency medical services, and hire and train more staff. We
also continued to expand and modernize hospitals and other facilities across the province to protect
quality health care, grow system capacity and support the best front-line health care workers in the
world.

Budget 2023 set the foundation to build a modern health care system that puts patients first. Over
the past year, we have worked to achieve the priorities outlined in the Government of Alberta’s
strategic plan as well as the Ministry of Health’s business plan. We have adapted to changing
circumstances, found ways to support innovation and engaged in conversations with Albertans and
health care professionals to help shape the future of health care in the province.

To support our refocusing initiative, we hosted in-person engagement sessions and virtual town
halls and provided online engagement tools to ensure health care workers, patients, families,
caregivers and community leaders across the province had an opportunity to participate in
conversations about current health care challenges and to propose potential solutions. More than
2,500 people participated in the in-person sessions, with an additional 18,000 providing feedback
online – a testament to the importance of this work to Albertans. Our refocusing work will continue
throughout 2024-25.

Other highlights of 2023-24 include:

        Continuing to implement the Alberta Surgical Initiative and completing 305,000 surgeries –
         an increase of approximately four per cent from 2022-23.
        Reducing EMS response times in metro-urban communities, communities with more than
         3,000 people and rural communities with fewer than 3,000 residents.
        Expanding access to MyHealth Records to allow Albertans to access more of their personal
         health information.
        Transitioning public laboratory services to Alberta Precision Laboratories, owned by
         Alberta Health Services, which has reduced wait times by 76 per cent since May 2023.
        Continuing to implement the Alberta Health Workforce Strategy, which sets out a
         framework to support current health care workers and to build a workforce that meets the
         needs of Albertans today and in the future.
        Signing of the Canada-Alberta bilateral agreement to invest $1.1 billion over three years to
         work together to improve health care for Canadians.



Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                      5
Introduction



I’d like to thank the world-class health care professionals who work tirelessly to provide patients in
every corner of the province with high-quality health care services. Together, we are building a
more resilient and sustainable health care system, and I look forward to our continued
collaboration over the coming year.




[Original signed by]

Honourable Adriana LaGrange
Minister of Health




6                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                            Introduction




Management’s Responsibility for Reporting

The Ministry of Health includes the Department of Health, Alberta Health Services and the Health
Quality Council of Alberta. The executives of the individual entities within the ministry have the
primary responsibility and accountability for the respective entities. Collectively, the executives
ensure the ministry complies with all relevant legislation, regulations and policies.

Ministry Business Plans, annual reports, performance results and the supporting management
information are integral to the government’s fiscal and strategic plan, annual report, quarterly
reports, and other financial and performance reporting.

Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the accompanying ministry financial information
and performance results for the ministry rests with the Minister of Health. Under the direction of
the Minister, I oversee the preparation of the ministry’s annual report, which includes the financial
information, performance results on all objectives and initiatives identified in the Ministry Business
Plan, and performance results for all ministry-supported commitments that were included in the
2023-26 Government of Alberta Strategic Plan. The financial information and performance results,
out of necessity, include amounts that are based on estimates and judgments. The financial
information is prepared using the government’s stated accounting policies, which are based on
Canadian public sector accounting standards. The performance measures are prepared in
accordance with the following criteria:

        Reliable - Information used in applying performance measure methodologies agrees with
         the underlying source data for the current and prior years’ results.
        Understandable - the performance measure methodologies and results are presented
         clearly.
        Comparable - the methodologies for performance measure preparation are applied
         consistently for the current and prior years’ results.
        Complete - outcomes, performance measures and related targets match those included in
         the ministry’s Budget 2023.


As Deputy Minister, in addition to program responsibilities, I am responsible for the ministry’s
financial administration and reporting functions. The ministry maintains systems of financial
management and internal control which give consideration to costs, benefits, and risks that are
designed to:

        provide reasonable assurance that transactions are properly authorized, executed in
         accordance with prescribed legislation and regulations, and properly recorded so as to
         maintain accountability of public money;
        provide information to manage and report on performance;
        safeguard the assets and properties of the province under ministry administration;
        provide Executive Council, the President of Treasury Board and Minister of Finance, and the
         Minister of Health the information needed to fulfill their responsibilities; and
        facilitate preparation of Ministry Business Plans and annual reports required under the
         Sustainable Fiscal Planning and Reporting Act.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                      7
Introduction




In fulfilling my responsibilities for the ministry, I have relied, as necessary, on the executives of the
individual entities within the ministry.



[Original signed by]

Andre Tremblay
Deputy Minister of Health
June 5, 2024




8                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                                                                          Results Analysis




Results Analysis

Table of Contents
    Ministry Overview ......................................................................................................................................... 10
          Organizational Structure .................................................................................................................... 10
          Operational Overview .......................................................................................................................... 12
          Key Highlights ......................................................................................................................................... 16
    Discussion and Analysis of Results......................................................................................................... 19
          Actions that support the priorities of the Government of Alberta Strategic Plan....... 19
          Outcome One: An effective and accessible health care system that provides
          Albertans with the necessary care when and where they need it ..................................... 21
          Outcome Two: A modernized, safe, person-centered, high quality and
          resilient health system that provides the most effective care now and in
          the future for each tax dollar spent ................................................................................................ 32
          Outcome Three: The health and well-being of all Albertans is protected,
          supported and improved, and health inequities among population
          groups are reduced ............................................................................................................................... 42
    Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology......................................................................... 55




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                                                                        9
Results Analysis




Ministry Overview
Organizational Structure
The Ministry of Health is refocusing Alberta’s health care system to improve health outcomes for
Albertans and empower health care workers to deliver quality care across the province. A
refocused health care system will provide Albertans with the necessary care when and where they
need it, enhance government’s ability to provide system-wide oversight, set system priorities, and
ensure accountability for those priorities on behalf of Albertans. The ministry supports Albertans’
health and well-being throughout their lives by protecting public health and promoting wellness;
coordinating and delivering safe, person-centered, quality health care services; planning capital
infrastructure; supporting innovative information management and technologies; regulating health
care; and, funding the health system.

The Ministry of Health currently consists of the Department of Health, Alberta Health Services
(AHS), and the Health Quality Council of Alberta. In the refocused health care system, provincial
sector-based health organizations will be created for acute care, continuing care, mental health and
addiction, and primary care. AHS will continue to have a strong role as part of the refocused system
as a hospital service provider. A separate integration council will be formed to ensure system
alignment, identify efficiencies, remove barriers and make sure the system is delivering better
health outcomes.

The Ministry of Health relies on collaboration with a range of health professionals; partners and
organizations in the health and social sectors; academic and research institutions; First Nations,
Metis Settlements, and the Métis Nation of Alberta; and other orders of government in delivering
health services as well as maintaining and improving Alberta’s health system. The Minister of
Health is supported by parliamentary secretaries for rural health and health workforce
engagement.




The Department of Health establishes the Government of Alberta’s strategic direction for health,
including advising government on health policy, legislation and standards, and public health
concerns; monitoring and reporting health system performance; setting policies and priorities for
the electronic/digital health environment; and providing oversight and ensuring accountability
across the health system.

The provincial acute care organization will oversee the delivery of acute care including care
delivered in all hospitals, urgent care centres, and chartered surgical facilities; emergency medical
services; and, cancer care. The organization will work directly with acute care service delivery
providers including AHS, Covenant Health and chartered surgical facilities to reduce wait times for


10                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                      Results Analysis



emergency departments, reduce wait times for surgeries, lower Emergency Medical Services (EMS)
response times and improve quality of acute care across the province.

The provincial continuing care organization will provide provincial oversight and coordination of
service delivery across the spectrum of continuing care, including continuing care homes and home
and community care. The organization will focus on achieving equitable, consistent, and timely
access to continuing care supports and services through a single, coordinated intake approach,
increasing the number and geographic distribution of continuing care spaces to meet the needs of
Albertans, and improving team-based, cross-sector care by leveraging other health and social
services.

The provincial primary care organization will coordinate primary health care services and provide
transparent provincial oversight. The organization will focus on ensuring all Albertans are attached
to a family physician or a nurse practitioner, providing timely access to high-quality primary care
services and supporting an integrated team of health professionals to provide comprehensive
primary care with appropriate access to patient health information.

The Health Quality Council of Alberta (HQCA) works collaboratively with health system partners on
a variety of topics and initiatives to improve the health system and patient safety, person-centred
care and health service quality across the province. The HQCA’s role will expand to support Alberta
Health and the provincial health care organizations to set performance standards and performance
indicators and to support audit and compliance functions.

The Office of the Alberta Health Advocates reports to the Minister of Health to improve patient care
and the health system. The advocates support Albertans in navigating the health system and
accessing the appropriate resolution services to address health care concerns, including those
specific to the Alberta Health Act, seniors, their families, and service providers.

In the refocused health care system, the Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction will oversee the
mental health and addiction organization.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                    11
Results Analysis



Operational Overview

Department of Health
In 2023-24, the department reorganized its organizational structure. Four new divisions were
established: Acute Care, Indigenous Health, Primary Care and System Refocusing, and changes were
made to the existing divisions to better align with the refocused health system, ministry strategic
objectives and to deliver on government’s priorities.

With direction from the Minister, the Deputy Minister is responsible for the daily operations of the
Department of Health, which is structured as follows:

Deputy Minister’s Office – provides leadership to the health system to ensure quality health
services, drives innovation, and builds and maintains collaborative relationships across
government ministries, AHS, the HQCA, and partner organizations. The office provides policy
coordination and issues management for the Minister and leadership in priority setting, decision-
making, and operations of the ministry. The office is also responsible for ministry correspondence
services.

Acute Care Division – leads the province’s renewed focus on acute care services, including
developing standards, monitoring and evaluating the acute care sector’s performance, and working
with partner divisions to oversee the delivery of hospital care, urgent care, cancer care, clinical
operations, surgeries, and EMS. The division also supports strategic policy for acute care, working
with partners to develop solutions for the acute care and EMS sectors, oversees the governance and
legislative compliance of EMS delivery and is currently supporting the implementation of the new
Alberta Standing Committee on EMS.

Continuing Care Division – develops provincial strategic policy and performance oversight for all
streams of continuing care services (home care, supportive living and continuing care homes) and
palliative and end-of-life care. The division works extensively with other government ministries,
AHS, and other relevant stakeholders (e.g., community organizations, researchers, etc.) to achieve
its mandate. This mandate includes directing continuing care policy through the development of
relevant strategies, legislation, standards, initiatives (grant funded and otherwise) and evaluation
frameworks to identify performance expectations and governance structures for monitoring system
performance. The division also administers the licensing and regulatory compliance monitoring
program for the continuing care sector. Over 1,000 continuing care sites throughout Alberta are
licensed, and the division safeguards the safety, security, and quality of life of residents and
continuing care clients through regular inspections and by investigating complaints and reportable
incidents. Inspection results are posted in the facility, provided to residents and their families, and
published on the Alberta Health website.

Finance and Capital Planning Division – develops and manages the ministry’s budget and funds
and monitors the financial activities of the department. It also provides financial advice and
prepares annual financial statements, ensuring compliance with Government of Alberta financial
legislation. The division oversees corporate planning and reporting; AHS accountability; systems
planning; capital planning and coordination of infrastructure projects with the Ministry of
Infrastructure and AHS. To enable the department to fulfill its mandate, the division coordinates the
department’s grant approval process and provides general administrative and contracting-based
corporate services. The division also manages registration, designation and bed survey processes
and reporting.

Health Information Systems Division – provides leadership and strategic direction for the
development and implementation of policy, legislation and standards for the provincial eHealth
environment, the Health Information Act and the department’s information and technology


12                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                         Results Analysis



requirements. The division is responsible for Alberta Netcare (electronic health record) and
MyHealth Records (personal health record), including health information policy and advice,
stakeholder engagement, strategic planning and project and system delivery and operations.

Health Workforce Division – develops and implements health workforce and system policies
related to insured health care provider compensation and health professions self-regulation.
Working in collaboration with stakeholders, the division oversees the implementation of key health
workforce planning and priorities such as the health workforce strategy and provides health
workforce planning support to enable a fiscally sustainable and effective health workforce to
support Albertans’ needs. Together, these initiatives support the government’s commitment to
build a health care system that is sustainable and serves the needs of Albertans.

Indigenous Health Division – leads government efforts to improve the health and well-being of
First Nations, Métis and Inuit Peoples in Alberta through culturally safe health care service delivery,
policy development, health promotion, knowledge exchange, and partnerships. The division
advances its critical work on First Nations, Métis and Inuit health by strengthening partnerships
with First Nations, Métis and Inuit partners and working with them to develop and implement
appropriate and meaningful healthcare for First Nations, Métis and Inuit Peoples in Alberta. The
division leads key mandate priorities, such as enhancing Alberta Health’s health policy and
planning capacity and stakeholder relationships, advancing the implementation of the Indigenous
Modernizing Alberta’s Primary Health Care System (MAPS) initiative, and working collaboratively
with First Nations, Métis, and Inuit partners, and health system providers to build a culturally safe
health care system.

Pharmaceutical and Supplementary Benefits Division – oversees and provides governance to the
Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan (AHCIP) and all government-sponsored supplementary health
benefits programs (i.e., Coverage for Seniors, Non-Group Coverage, Assured Income for the Severely
Handicapped, Income Support, Alberta Adult/Child Health Benefit programs, Ukrainian Evacuee
Health Benefit, Alberta Aids to Daily Living, and Dental and Optical Assistance for Seniors
programs) that provide Albertans with pharmaceutical, optical, dental and other medical supports
(wheelchairs, prosthetics, oxygen, medical/surgical supplies, etc.). The division is also responsible
for Alberta’s participation in the National Blood Program and advising the Minister in their role as a
corporate member of Canadian Blood Services.

Primary Care Division – responsible for developing policy and performance oversight of primary
care, including establishing the new primary care organization and models (e.g., Regional Primary
Health Care Networks) and developing related accountability mechanisms, such as standards and
legislative tools. The division is also responsible for developing and implementing key policy
initiatives aligned with the government renewed focus on primary care, such as the implementation
of the Modernizing Alberta’s Primary Care System (MAPS) initiative, supporting the administration
and governance of Primary Care Networks (PCNs), and strengthening relationships with key
stakeholders. The division will oversee primary and community health; chronic disease
management; and the administration and governance of PCNs to meet the needs of Albertans. The
division collaborates with stakeholders, such as physicians; nurse practitioners; registered nurses;
licenced practical nurses; health professions’ regulatory colleges; and health system leaders from
academia and the community to support provision of quality primary health care services to
Albertans. The mandate of the division is achieved through evidence-informed and value-oriented
initiatives, promotion of the patient medical home initiative through PCNs and their governance
structure; performance monitoring and evaluation; and, collaboration with health professions’
regulatory colleges to support patient safety.

Public and Rural Health Division – provides strategic direction and leadership on emerging public
health risks; communicable diseases; immunization; compliance monitoring; environmental public


Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                      13
Results Analysis



health; newborn screening; health promotion; and, emergency preparedness, response and
recovery, through the assessment, development and implementation of provincial policies,
regulations, strategies, and standards. The division carries out these functions to support
innovation and engagement with Albertans in wellness, health promotion, and injury and disease
prevention. To support health system quality, the division collaborates with partners to perform
compliance and monitoring activities and enforcement of the acts, regulations and standards
administered by the division in the areas of physician billing, infection prevention and control
oversight, and protection for persons in publicly funded care. The division is also responsible for
the development of rural health-related policy.

Strategic Planning and Performance Division – responsible for providing leadership for health
care research and innovation, including monitoring, assessing, and improving health system
performance. The division is the primary source for Alberta’s overall health system data standards
and analytics, evaluating the health system’s performance to support evidence-based policy
decisions for all health sectors. The division is also responsible for the Freedom of Information and
Protection of Privacy Act (FOIP), strategic policy and initiatives, governance of health agencies, and
all Cabinet-related materials, as well as intergovernmental relations. The division leads the
department’s strategic policy development and works with other divisions on developing
performance and reporting standards for the health care system.

System Refocusing Division – responsible for implementing the new direction for Alberta's health
care system to improve health outcomes for Albertans and empower health care workers to deliver
quality care across the province. This includes refocusing to support a unified health system with
four sectors: primary care, acute care, continuing care, and mental health and addiction; supporting
divisions, AHS, and system partners in achieving the new direction; and, engaging with health care
workers and members of the public to understand the current system and support a smooth
transition for the health care system.

Office of the Chief Medical Officer of Health – monitors and reports on the health of Albertans and
advises on actions to protect and promote the health of the public under authority of the Public
Health Act. This includes legislated responsibilities related to disease surveillance, communicable
disease outbreaks, infection prevention and control measures, health risk assessments, and states
of public health emergencies. The Office of the Chief Medical Officer of Health provides strategic
leadership, oversight, support and clinical expertise on issues of public health importance to
Albertans. The Office works closely with diverse partners within and beyond the health system,
including the department’s Public and Rural Health Division and Medical Officers of Health at AHS
and Indigenous Services Canada, to facilitate policies, processes and programs to prevent chronic
diseases, control the spread of communicable diseases, support health surveillance, and strengthen
the public health system in Alberta.

Communications (Communications and Public Engagement-Health) – through Communications
and Public Engagement (CPE), CPE-Health provides Albertans and health system partners with
information about ministry policies, programs, and initiatives. The CPE-Health team works with
department staff to develop and implement communication plans and offers communications
support, such as media relations, issues management, writing and editing services, product
development, and online communications services. CPE-Health also works closely with AHS and
other reporting entities to coordinate ministry communications.

Health Law – through Alberta Justice, a team of lawyers support all aspects of the department’s
activities, ranging from grant agreements and contracting and procurement to developing and
interpreting legislation and general legal advice to the ministry.




14                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                     Results Analysis



Human Resources – through the Public Service Commission, Human Resources is dedicated to
supporting initiatives, delivering programs, and providing human resource expertise and services
that attract, retain, and engage the department’s workforce. The branch works in partnership with
managers and employees to build and sustain workforce capacity to achieve business goals and
create an environment where employees are respected, valued, engaged and resilient.

Procurement & System Optimization Secretariat – The Procurement and System Optimization
Secretariat (Secretariat) supports system-wide optimization (i.e., cross-sector optimization
projects, etc.) and leads development and negotiation of contracts and standing offers for system-
wide ancillary services and to support system-wide optimization, where appropriate. The
Secretariat establishes spending and urgency thresholds to support local procurement and decision
making, as required. The overall goal is to maintain the benefits of a centralized procurement
function, while at the same time adapting to local needs where required and where it makes sense.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                  15
Results Analysis



Key Highlights
In 2023-24, the Ministry of Health focused on accomplishing three outcomes identified in the 2023-
26 Ministry Business Plan:

    An effective and accessible health care system that provides Albertans with the necessary care
     when and where they need it.
    A modernized, safe, person-centered, high quality and resilient health system that provides the
     most effective care now and in the future for each tax dollar spent.
    The health and well-being of all Albertans is protected, supported and improved, and health
     inequities among population groups are reduced.

The following table represents the key highlights and results achieved by the Ministry of Health in
2023-24. The content in this report is valid as of June 5, 2024; some information is still being
assessed and therefore is not reflected.

Health Care Action       Alberta Health continued to implement the HCAP, released November 2022,
Plan (HCAP)              to ensure immediate improvements in key areas of health care and build a
                         better health care system for Albertans. The HCAP focuses on four goals:
                         reducing wait times for surgeries; decreasing emergency department wait
                         times; improving EMS response times; and, empowering frontline workers to
                         deliver health care.

Decreasing               Work continues on several initiatives aimed at improving access to
emergency                emergency care and reducing wait times. A primary focus is on improving
department (ED)          patient flow through emergency rooms/acute inpatient wards and out to the
wait times               community to increase patient safety and experience.

Improving                Government remained committed to reducing EMS response times through
emergency medical        the implementation of the HCAP. In 2023-24, a total of $663 million was
services (EMS)           spent on EMS. Further, as a result of the EMS Return to Service initiative that
response time            was launched in March 2023 to support paramedics in the safe handover of
                         patient care to ED staff within a 45-minute target, there was an overall
                         decrease in the amount of time paramedics spent in hospital from an average
                         of 3.0 hours in in 2022-23 to 1.6 hours as of March 31, 2024.

Reducing wait times      Work continued on prioritizing surgeries and allocating operating room time
for surgeries as part    according to the greatest need; streamlining referrals from primary care to
of the Alberta           specialists; increasing surgeries at underutilized operating rooms, mainly in
Surgical Initiative      rural areas; and, providing less complex surgeries through chartered surgical
(ASI)                    facilities.

Building health          In 2023-24, Alberta Health continued to implement actions and initiatives to
workforce capacity       address Alberta’s health care workforce needs and ensure the health care
                         system has sufficient workforce to support Albertans’ health needs now, and
                         in the future. Efforts include working with the Ministry of Advanced
                         Education and Alberta’s post-secondary institutions to expand the number of
                         nursing student seats, undergraduate medicine seats and post-graduate
                         medical residency seats in Alberta’s medical schools. In 2023-24,
                         $158 million was invested for initiatives to train, recruit and retain more
                         health care professionals for Alberta, with a focus on rural areas.



16                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                           Results Analysis



Modernizing                  The government continued to implement the Modernizing Alberta’s Primary
Alberta’s primary            Health Care System (MAPS) initiative that was launched in September 2022
care system                  to address urgent pressures, help stabilize the primary health care system,
                             and increase access to the health care Albertans need. On October 18, 2023,
                             the MAPS final reports for the Strategic Advisory Panel and the Indigenous
                             Primary Health Care Advisory Panel were released, which identified
                             immediate, medium- and long-term improvements to strengthen Alberta’s
                             primary health care system, with a targeted stream for Indigenous peoples
                             across the province. Budget 2023 invested $243 million to develop new
                             models of care and stabilize the primary care system to improve primary
                             health care for Albertans, which included almost 51 per cent, or $125 million,
                             being invested over three years to implement recommendations from both
                             MAPS final reports.

Health Care System           The Government of Alberta is refocusing the health care system to prioritize
Refocusing                   patient care and empower frontline health care workers, including those
Initiatives                  serving rural, remote and Indigenous communities, to deliver the highest
                             quality health care. The refocused system will improve patient outcomes and
                             access through the creation of dedicated sector-based health organizations
                             for acute care, continuing care, mental health and addiction, and primary
                             care within a unified provincial health care system.

Continuing care              Alberta Health continued to reshape the continuing care system based on the
transformation               recommendations from the Facility-Based Continuing Care review, the
                             Palliative and End-of-Life Care engagement, and learnings from COVID-19.
                             The new Continuing Care Act came into effect on April 1, 2024, setting the
                             conditions for change in the continuing care sector to support more
                             Albertans to age at home; improve workforce flexibility; and, enhance service
                             quality and oversight to assist Albertans transitioning between care types
                             and settings, including home and community care, supportive living
                             accommodations, and continuing care homes.

Innovation and               Government continued to provide digital access to health information to
modernizing digital          empower Albertans on their health journey within a person-centered health
health services              care model. In 2023-24, the ministry made progress on key innovations such
                             as the expansion of information available through the MyHealth Records
                             (MHR) portal, and linking community primary care information into
                             Alberta’s Electronic Health Record (Alberta Netcare) to support patients and
                             their care teams in making better clinical decisions. As of March 31, 2024,
                             there were over 1.7 million MHRs users, with an average daily login of
                             25,000 users. In addition, over 2,780 community clinics and 1,670
                             community pharmacies were using Alberta Netcare.

Canada Health                In 2023-24, Alberta received $6 billion from the Government of Canada
Transfer                     through the Canada Health Transfer (CHT); this included a one-time CHT top
                             up of $233 million during 2023-24 to address immediate pressure on the
                             health care system. In December 2023, Alberta’s government also signed a
                             bi-lateral agreement with the federal government on shared health care
                             priorities to improve access to high-quality family health services, including
                             in rural and remote areas, and for underserved communities. The agreement
                             included $285 million over the next three fiscal years (2023-24 to 2025-26).
                             This funding will support actions and prorities to improve and strengthen


Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                        17
Results Analysis



                        primary health care in Alberta, including support for First Nations, Métis and
                        Inuit Peoples through the Indigenous MAPS initiative. In addition, Alberta
                        executed the Aging with Dignity bi-lateral agreement in March 2024 for $627
                        million to be funded over the period from 2023-24 to 2027-28.

Strengthening rural     Making sure Alberta’s rural and remote communities have the doctors and
health capacity         nurses it needs to support the health care system was a priority for the
                        government. In 2023-24, the ministry invested $158 million on initiatives to
                        educate, recruit, and retain health care professionals, particularly for rural
                        areas. These initiatives included: rural physician education programs;
                        financial incentives for rural physicians such as the Rural Remote Northern
                        Program; the Rural Health Professions Action Plan (RhPAP); targeted
                        recruitment of internationally educated nurses; and, implementation of the
                        Alberta Medical Association Agreement.

Protecting              In 2023-24, over $1 billion was spent to support population and public
population and          health initiatives to maintain and improve the health of Albertans. Alberta
public health           Health continues to protect Albertans through injury prevention;
                        environmental public health and food safety; immunization; and, primary
                        prevention, testing and treatment of chronic diseases such as diabetes and
                        cancer, as well as communicable diseases, sexually transmitted and blood
                        borne illnesses and respiratory viruses.

Alberta Ukrainian       In 2023-24, Alberta Health continued to support the Ukrainian Evacuee
Evacuees Health         Alberta Health Benefit. As of March 2024, the benefit has provided
Benefit Program         supplementary health benefits coverage to over 43,000 Ukrainian evacuees.
                        In addition, Ukrainian evacuees have benefited from the Ukrainian Evacuee
                        Temporary Health Benefits Program, which was established in March 2022
                        to provide publicly funded health insurance coverage to Ukrainian evacuees.
                        As of March 26, 2024, 52,819 Ukrainian evacuees were receiving public
                        health insurance coverage through the benefit program.

Improving health        As part of the MAPS Indigenous Primary Health Care Advisory Panel’s Final
care access for         Report, which was released on October 18, 2023 and contained 22
underserved             recommendations to address immediate challenges facing Indigenous
populations and for     patients, communities, and organizations, the ministry has established the
First Nations, Métis,   Indigenous Primary Health Care Innovation Fund and Indigenous Patient
and Inuit peoples       Navigator grant programs. Through these programs, government will invest
                        in Indigenous health care service providers and agencies to deliver
                        comprehensive primary health care services closer to home. Further, Budget
                        2023 provided approximately $1 million over three years (2023-24 to 2025-
                        26) to each of the two Indigenous post-secondary institutions to support
                        delivery of the Health Care Aide (HCA) program in an Indigenous learning
                        environment.



The Ministry of Health remains committed to regulatory approaches and program delivery that
reduces unnecessary government oversight and emphasizes outcomes, to improve access to
government services, attract investment, support innovation and competitiveness, and grow
Alberta businesses.



18                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                         Results Analysis




Discussion and Analysis of Results
Actions that support the priorities of the Government of Alberta Strategic Plan



 Key Priority Two:
 Standing up for Albertans

 Objective Four: Ensuring an accessible and modernized health care system

     Improving access for underserved populations and for First Nations, Métis, and Inuit peoples
      to quality health services that support improved health outcomes by promoting and
      exploring novel, innovative, and creative strategies.

      Detailed reporting found on page 47 – 48 (Key Objective 3.3)

     Implementing actions identified by the Health Care Action Plan to improve Emergency
      Medical Services system response times, reduce emergency department and surgical wait
      times to ensure patients are receiving the appropriate level of care, and empowering
      frontline workers to better deliver health care services.

      Detailed reporting found on page 21 – 28 (Key Objective 1.1)

     Modernizing continuing care, primary health care, and digital health systems to increase
      choice, enhance access, and improve the quality of care for Albertans.

      Detailed reporting found on page 50 – 54 (Key Objective 3.5)

     Addressing health care staffing challenges by investing $158 million in 2023-24 towards
      initiatives to train, recruit, and retain more health care professionals for Alberta. This work
      is supported by Alberta’s Health Workforce Strategy and the Rural Health Professions Action
      Plan, addressing specific challenges in remote and rural communities, as well as creating
      additional seats for physician training at Alberta’s medical schools.

      Detailed reporting found on page 28 -29 (Key Objective 1.2)

     Addressing the province’s critical nursing shortage by making it easier for credentialed
      nurses from the Philippines to bring their skills to Alberta patients. Government is attracting
      internationally educated nurses by addressing barriers faced by many internationally
      trained nurses, including the navigation of complex regulatory requirements, assessment
      and licensing processes, and having access to clinical placements.

      Detailed reporting found on page 28 -29 (Key Objective 1.2)




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                        19
Results Analysis




     Investing $4.2 billion over three years in capital funding to maintain or expand health care
      facilities across the province. This includes funding for the redevelopment and expansion of
      the Red Deer Regional Hospital, which will increase critical services and add capacity to one
      of the largest hospitals in the province.

      Detailed reporting found on page 34 – 36 (Key Objective 2.2)

 Objective Six: Partnering with Indigenous communities

     Working with the federal government to improve access for Indigenous Peoples to key
      services such as education and health care, and advocating for on-reserve services for
      persons with developmental disabilities, addiction and/or mental health issues.

      Detailed reporting found on page 47 – 48 (Key Objective 3.3)

 Objective Eight: Building better communities

     Assisting Ukrainian evacuees fleeing the Russian invasion through the provision of supports
      and services to help them settle and integrate into communities across the province,
      including initiatives to address recommendations from the Premier’s Advisory Task Force on
      Ukraine.

      Detailed reporting found on page 34 (Key Objective 2.2)




20                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                          Results Analysis



Outcome One: An effective and accessible health care system that provides Albertans
with the necessary care when and where they need it


Key Objectives

1.1       Implement the Health Care Action Plan to strengthen the Emergency Medical Services
          (EMS) system, reduce surgical wait times, decrease emergency department wait times,
          and empower frontline workers to provide improved services to Albertans with
          immediate health care needs.

Alberta is committed to creating an effective and accessible health care system that provides
Albertans with the necessary care when and where they need it. The Government continues to
prioritize building health system capacity to have a high-quality health system that meets patients’
needs and provides access to the most appropriate care in the most suitable setting. This includes
building surgical, emergency medical services (EMS) and Intensive Care Unit (ICU) capacities, as
well as the health workforce. Several initiatives are underway to expand the capacity of Alberta’s
publicly funded health care system and minimize disruptions to patient care. This includes
preparing to respond more effectively to any future health crises and reduce wait times across the
health care system. A resilient, sustainable health system will allow the system to operate at full
capacity for longer periods before needing to adjust health care resources. This policy has overall
goals of improving access to scheduled health services, improving wait times and reporting, and
ensuring timely communication for patients.

The ministry remains unwavering in its focus on increasing surgical capacity to keep pace with
demand and reduce the length of time Albertans are waiting for scheduled surgeries. Efforts are
geared towards improving patient navigation of the health care system through enhanced care
coordination and surgical pathways and resources; improving specialist advice and collaboration
with family physicians before consultation; and, centralizing referrals for distribution to the most
appropriate surgeon with a shorter wait list.

Alberta Health continued to implement the Health Care Action Plan (HCAP), released in November
2022, to ensure immediate improvements in key areas of health care and build a better health care
system for Albertans. The HCAP has four goals: decreasing emergency department wait times;
improving EMS response times; reducing wait times for surgeries; and, empowering frontline
workers to deliver health care.

As part of HCAP, a key priority for the ministry in 2023-24 was to continue with the
implementation of the Alberta Surgical Initiative (ASI), a surgical access improvement plan with a
patient-first focus to reduce surgery wait lists and wait times, and strengthen surgical services in
Alberta. This will ensure that Albertans are receiving surgeries within clinically recommended wait
times. Through the ASI, Alberta Health continued to work with Alberta Health Services (AHS) to
improve and standardize the entire surgical journey through:
          prioritizing surgeries and allocating operating room time according to the greatest need;
          streamlining referrals from primary care to specialists;
          increasing surgeries at underutilized operating rooms, mainly in rural areas; and,
          providing less complex surgeries through accredited Chartered Surgical Facilities (CSFs) to
           help provide publicly funded insured services and extend existing capacity in hospitals.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                       21
Results Analysis



CSFs continue to be an integral part of the ASI implementation to enable increased volume of
publicly funded surgeries at no cost to patients. In 2023-24, there were 39 existing CSFs, which
included one new CSF contract that was implemented to expand publicly funded surgical capacity
in these facilities. CSFs are an extension of existing capacity in hospitals and are used in many other
Canadian health systems. Under the Health Facilities Act, CSFs providing publicly funded insured
services must be accredited by the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Alberta, and have a signed
service contract with AHS.

In 2023-24, accredited CSFs in Alberta provided over 62,400 surgeries, up from a total of 47, 400
surgeries provided in previous year. This is approximately 20.5 per cent of all publicly funded
scheduled surgeries being performed in CSFs in 2023-24, a significant increase from the 16.2 per
cent of surgeries that were performed in CSFs in 2022-23. One agreement was added with a CSF to
provide up to 800 otolaryngology (ear, nose and throat) surgeries and another was amended to
increase the volume by 400 surgeries annually. In 2023-24, AHS also entered into agreements with
CSFs in Edmonton and Calgary for up to 6,000 orthopedic surgeries annually. The volume of
surgeries performed at CSFs is expected to continue to increase over the coming years as more CSFs
become operational.

In 2023-24, a total of over 304,500 surgeries were completed, which was over 10,200 or
approximately four per cent more than the 294,300 surgeries in 2022-23. As of March 31, 2024,
there were over 5,000 fewer surgery cases waiting longer than clinically recommended than at the
start of the fiscal year (i.e., 27,159 surgery cases compared to 32,200 surgery cases in April 2023).
This was almost a 16 per cent improvement compared to 2022-23.

Wait times for surgical procedures are an indicator of access to the health care system and a
reflection of efficient use of resources. This indicator tracks the proportion of the three common
surgical procedures completed within the national wait time benchmarks. In 2023-24, more
Albertans received knee and hip replacements procedures within the national wait time
benchmarks compared to 2022-23. Hip replacements, at 62.4 per cent, improved by 19 per cent
compared to the prior year. The proportion of knee replacements that met national wait time
benchmarks increased to 53.3 per cent, an improvement of 21 per cent when compared to last year.
These improvements were due to continued expansion of surgical capacity as more chartered
surgical facilities (CSFs) become fully operational and the optimization of surgical capacity across
the province, especially in rural communities. However, 59.7 per cent of cataract surgical
procedures met national wait time benchmarks in 2023-24, a decline of 5 per cent when compared
to last year. This metric is influenced by the level of demand for cataract surgery and the continued
efforts to prioritize patients who have waited longest for surgeries. These patients are often
individuals who have waited longer than the national benchmark for clinical recommended
timelines.

The improvements in surgical procedures reflect progress towards expanding surgical capacity as
per the Alberta Surgical Initiatives and Health Care Action Plan led by the Ministry of Health, which
contributes to lower wait times. Ongoing actions include ministry initiatives to streamline the
surgery referrals system, prioritize surgeries to the greatest need, and provide less-complex
surgeries through CSFs. However, wait times for surgical procedures continue to be impacted by
delayed surgeries due to the pandemic, an aging population and health system capacity.




22                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                                   Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 1.c
Percentage of surgical procedures that met national wait time benchmarks

             Surgery                                          Prior Years’ Results                                    2023-24
      (national benchmark)                2019-20           2020-21            2021-22            2022-233             Actual
     Hip replacement1                       65.5%             51.6%              51.2%              43.0%               62.4%
    (benchmark 182 days)
     Knee replacement2                      61.5%             43.3%              39.7%              32.5%               53.3%
    (benchmark 182 days)
     Cataract surgery                       45.1%             45.3%              64.7%              64.7%               59.7%
    (benchmark 112 days)
Source: Alberta Health Services
Notes: 1 Hip replacement data include totals, partials, resurfacings, primaries and revisions for scheduled/elective cases.
       2. Knee replacement data include totals, partials, unicondylars, primaries and revisions for scheduled/elective cases.
       3 The percentages of all the three surgeries performed within national benchmark for 2022-23 have been updated to reflect

          additional data received after publication.

The ministry also worked on additional actions as part of the ASI to improve access and wait times
for surgery. AHS partnered with the Institute for Healthcare Optimization, through a grant provided
by Alberta Health, to implement surgical smoothing techniques (e.g., performing scheduled and
urgent surgeries in different operating rooms) to improve the flow of surgical patients through
AHS’ busiest facilities. A progress report on this initiative is expected later in 2024. Alberta Health
provided AHS with grants to implement projects and additional measures to improve access and
wait times for surgery, which included approximately $1.4 million for Rapid Access Clinics, over
$1.5 million for prehabilitation, over $1.4 million for the Virtual Health Hospital, almost $577,000
for the Regional Surgical & Obstetrical Network of Alberta and approximately $20 million for ASI
Capital Equipment.

In October 2023, AHS launched a prehabilitation pilot in Edmonton to provide patients with the
information they need to prepare for surgery to improve surgical outcomes. Also, in February 2024,
AHS initiated a pilot with three Rapid Access Clinics to expedite musculoskeletal assessments for
individuals referred for orthopedic services. These clinics will determine if patients require surgery
or non-surgical treatment. These actions are expected to reduce referrals to orthopedic surgeons
and allow patients to start non-surgical treatment in a more timely fashion.

Addressing surgical workforce challenges to support continued expansion of surgical capacity was
also a key priority in 2023-24. As of December 31, 2023, there were 456 Anesthesiologists
registered in Alberta, up from 441 from December 31, 2022 - a 3.4 per cent increase. AHS continued
to work on increasing operating room hours across the province, including upgrades and work on
new surgical suites in 15 communities across Alberta. Further, Budget 2023 invested $237 million
in capital funding over three years to add and expand operating rooms in hospitals across the
province. This investment will boost surgery capacity in Brooks, Calgary, Camrose, Crowsnest Pass,
Edmonton, Fort Saskatchewan, Grande Prairie, Innisfail, Olds, Pincher Creek, Ponoka, Red Deer, St.
Albert, Stettler, Taber, Edson, Lethbridge, Medicine Hat and Rocky Mountain House. In 2023-24,
AHS was provided a grant of $20 million to support implementing the capital program.

The government also recognized that Medical Device Reprocessing (MDR) is an essential clinical
support service and is especially important in supporting government’s efforts to reduce surgical
backlogs and increase surgical capacity. This was why Budget 2023 invested $104.7 million over
three years to renovate MDR departments in five hospitals, including Foothills Medical Centre in


Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                                   23
Results Analysis



Calgary, the Westlock Health Centre, the Northern Lights Regional Hospital Centre in Fort
McMurray, the Sturgeon Community Hospital in St. Albert, and the Royal Alexandra Hospital in
Edmonton. This will allow for planning to begin on these priority MDR departments.

The performance measure on the ED wait times tracks the time to see a physician after being
triaged on arrival 90 per cent of the time in the 16 largest hospitals. The lower the number the
better, as it demonstrates patients are receiving timely assessment and treatment at EDs. In 2023-
24, the wait time to see a physician in the ED was 6.7 hours compared to 6.2 hours in 2022-23. The
trend showed that patients were waiting 0.5 hours longer in the ED to see a physician in 2023-24
compared to last year. The longer ED wait times was due to an increase in ED visits and the number
of patients with the highest level of acuity that require aggressive interventions such as patients
with cardiac arrest or major trauma. In 2023-24, there was approximately a 2 per cent increase in
total visits to EDs across Alberta, including a 13 per cent increase in the number of patients with the
highest level of acuity. In addition, high hospital occupancy and patients waiting in hospital for
placement in continuing care contribute to longer ED wait times. The ministry continued to work
on initiatives to improve ED wait times by expanding care delivery options in the community to
support care outside the ED, improving access to continuing care, expanding hospital capacity, and
implementing strategies in hospitals to streamline patient treatment and discharge.

Several initiatives are underway across the province to reduce emergency department (ED) wait
times through increased staff recruitment and retention, and efficient patient movement through
the ED. These include expanding Health Link Virtual MD hours of operation, and expanding the
EMS/811 Shared Response Line to include direct referral to the Health Link RN team and the
Addiction and Mental Health Helpline. AHS increased staffing by adding 114 full-time equivalent
(FTEs) nurses to ED teams in Alberta’s 16 largest hospitals (including the Alberta Children’s
Hospital and the Stollery Children's Hospital) and some of Alberta’s suburban hospitals to ensure a
safe and faster patient transfer of care from paramedics to ED staff. AHS added 127 FTEs to allied
health staff (social workers, physiotherapists, and occupational therapists) and pharmacies to boost
ED resources. Patients are now spending less time at the ED before being admitted, with 90 per
cent of patients admitted within 39 hours as of January 2024, down from 42 hours in November
2022.


Performance Measure 1.a
Emergency department wait times: 90th percentile time to initial physician assessment in
the 16 largest sites (hours)

                                                                                                              2023-24            2023-24
                                                        2020-21            2021-22          2022-23
                                                                                                               Target             Actual
  Emergency department wait times:
  90th percentile time to initial                                                                              Below
                                                            3.4               4.5*             6.2*                                  6.7
  physician assessment in the 16                                                                              2022-23
  largest sites (hours)
* The methodology was revised to exclude data for patients that ‘Left Without Being Seen’ and results were updated from 4.6 to 4.5 hours
  in 2021-22 and 6.3 to 6.2 hours in 2022-23.

On November 21, 2023, a new ED opened at the Misericordia Community Hospital in Edmonton.
The new ED includes 5,500 square meters of spaces (an increase from 1,700 square meters), six
ambulance bays (increased from four), 64 treatment rooms (an increase from 26 rooms), two
radiology rooms, five isolation rooms (an increase from one), 18 acute care spaces (increased from
12) and a decontamination suite. The new ED is three times larger than the old one and has the



24                                                                                                 Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                         Results Analysis



capacity to handle up to 60,000 visits per year which will help reduce wait times and strain on
other EDs in the Edmonton region.

In addition, over $24 million was spent in 2023-24 on completion of Phase 1 of the Peter Lougheed
Centre ED redevelopment, which includes a larger, upgraded triage area, modern care spaces and
an improved resusciation and trauma space. The construction of the next phase of the
redevelopment has started that will include 25 additional care spaces. AHS also launched 36 beds at
the Bridge Healing Transitional Accommodation Program in Edmonton to support the transition of
patients experiencing homelessness discharged from the ED.

To improve patient flow throughout the acute care system, government is working with AHS to
reduce the number of Albertans who have finished their required hospital care and are waiting in
hospital beds until they can be moved to a more appropriate setting, such as a continuing care
space or community care services. Between November 2023 and March 2024, an additional 150
temporary continuing care spaces were created in the province to help free up hospital beds to
reduce ED and surgical wait times.

Improving emergency medical services (EMS) response times is a top priority for government.
Alberta Health continues to work with AHS to improve EMS by implementing the HCAP and
recommendations from the Alberta EMS Provincial Advisory Committee (AEPAC) and EMS Dispatch
Review. The AEPAC recommendations focused on accountability, capacity, efficiencies, operations,
performance, and workforce support for EMS. Changes are being made to improve EMS response
times and get paramedics out of hospital waiting rooms and back into their communities. In
November 2023, a Ministerial Directive was issued to AHS to ensure the continued improvement of
the EMS system and response times, including the creation of the Alberta EMS Standing Committee
and the shared coordination of Alberta Health and AHS on EMS-related initiatives and decisions
such as the implementation of the AEPAC and EMS Dispatch Review recommendations.

The performance measure on EMS response times helps evaluate the timeliness of ambulance
services. The shorter the time demonstrates system responsiveness and the ability to provide
timely medical care to patients in the community. The EMS response times for which 90 per cent of
the most urgent calls were responded to in metro/urban communities, communities with over
3,000 residents and rural communities with under 3,000 residents all met or exceeded their
performance targets in 2023-24. For metro/urban communities, the EMS response time decreased
to 13.8 minutes, an improvement of 21 per cent from the prior year, while communities with over
3,000 residents saw a 14 per cent improvement in their EMS response time to 16.3 minutes from
18.9 minutes from 2022-23. EMS response times for rural communities with under 3,000 residents,
at 33.3 minutes, improved by five per cent from 2022-23. In contrast, EMS response times for the
most urgent calls in remote communities increased slightly to 64.9 minutes from 61.8 minutes due
to staffing challenges and seasonal changes in staff availability. Staffing continues to be impacted by
vacancies, sick time, and worker compensation claims. Also, seasonal changes in the number of
overtime and casual shifts that staff are willing to pick-up impacts staffing levels, which typically
decreases during the summer months.

The ministry understands there is more to do to improve response times and EMS coverage in rural
and remote communities through the implementation of the AEPAC and Dispatch Review
recommendations. The ministry continued to take actions to keep paramedics out of hospital
waiting rooms and in communities, which have contributed to decreased EMS response times and
red alerts, improved community coverage, and quicker access to EMS. The EMS Return to Service
initiative, launched in 2023 to support paramedics to safely hand over patient care to ED staff
within a 45-minute target, is now fully operational in all major hospitals. The time paramedics
spent in hospital before being able to respond to another call decreased from 3.0 hours in 2022-23
to 1.6 hours as of March 31, 2024. This was an improvement of almost 49 percent compared to


Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                      25
Results Analysis



2022-23. Additional actions included the continued implementation of the EMS/811 Shared
Response to allow calls that have been assessed as not experiencing a medical emergency that
requires an ambulance to be transferred to Health Link 811, ensuring that patients get the care they
need and reducing unnecessary ambulance responses.

Performance Measure 1.b
EMS 90th percentile response times (minutes) for the most urgent (life threatening) calls


                                                 EMS Response Time for the Most Urgent Calls (minutes) 1

                                           2020-21               2021-22              2022-23           2023-24           2023-24
                                                                                                         Target            Actual

  Metro/urban                                                                                            Below
                                             11.7                  14.6                 17.5                                13.8
  communities                                                                                           2022-23

  Communities with over                                                                                  Below
                                             15.7                  18.6                 18.9                                16.3
  3,000 residents                                                                                       2022-23
  Rural communities with                                                                                 Below
                                             31.6                  33.8                 33.9                                33.3
  under 3000 residents                                                                                  2022-23
  Remote communities                                                                                     Below
                                             55.1                  55.4                 61.8                                64.9
                                                                                                        2022-23
Source: Alberta Health Services as of March 31, 2024.
Notes: 1 Measures 90th percentile, meaning these are the response times for 90 per cent of activity.



In 2023-24, implementation of the AEPAC report recommendations and other actions continued to
help several key strategic initiatives and other pressures identified through HCAP. In 2023-24,
Calgary and Edmonton saw 19 twelve-hour shifts and an additional 20 twelve-hour shifts added
respectively to manage peak volumes during the busiest times of the day. AHS also added more
ambulance coverage in Chestermere, Lethbridge, Okotoks and Red Deer. For calendar year 2023,
EMS hired 470 new staff members including 362 paramedics. In January 2024, EMS hired 32 new
staff members including 20 paramedics. There has been a 16.9 per cent increase in EMS staff
employed by AHS between December 2019 and January, 2024.

As of March 31, 2024, 50 out of 53 recommendations from the AEPAC report have been completed
or are in progress, while 44 of the 45 recommendations from the Dispatch Review have been
completed or are in progress. Examples of projects completed inlude:
         Allowing the use of Emergency Medical Responders (EMRs) on class 1 and 2 ambulances
          and an EMR in place of primary care paramedic when required on class 4 ambulances under
          the Ground Ambulance Regulation.
         Enabling firefighters functioning as Medical First Responders (MFRs), who are also
          registered paramedics, the ability to cancel incoming EMS resources.
         Enabling registered paramedics working as MFRs in Alberta’s seven integrated fire-EMS
          services to log onto spare ambulances and transport as necessary and if possible.

Other examples of projects executed by Alberta Health in conjuction with AHS to address the
AEPAC report and the Dispatch Review recommendations and strengthen the EMS system across
the province include:



26                                                                                               Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                        Results Analysis



        Implemented alternative transport methods for non-medical patient transfers to patients’
         homes from a facility or acute care, such as community shuttles, wheelchair accessible taxis,
         and other local options. AHS expects that 15 per cent of transports will be diverted from
         EMS, allowing paramedics to respond to approximately 70 more events per day.
        Issued a request for expressions of interest and qualifications for dedicated services to
         provide lower acuity inter-facility transfers in the Calgary and Edmonton areas and drafted
         contracts with two successful proponents.
        Completed an independent review and analysis of air ambulance landing sites in Alberta
         that included an assessment of landing site impacts on overall EMS performance, landing
         site prioritization based on needs, and recommendations for operational policy and
         protocols to better support landing site operators. Alberta Health developed a landing sites
         grant program and rolled it out to support impacted municipalities.
        Created the Alberta EMS Standing Committee to coordinate EMS-related initiatives and
         decisions such as the implementation of the AEPAC and Dispatch Review recommendations.
        Completed an external review of EMS resource allocation to evaluate ambulance placement
         in the province. The ministry is now reviewing the report of the external review.
        Began development of a comprehensive performance framework for the EMS system.

The Government of Alberta continues to prioritize actions to improve access and reduce wait times
for medically necessary diagnostic tests. Each year, Alberta spends about $1 billion on diagnostic
imaging, which includes ultrasounds, X-rays, mammography, MRI scans and CT scans. Of this,
46 per cent is allocated to AHS and 54 per cent is allocated to community diagnostic imaging
providers. About one-third of all CT and MRI scans are emergency scans and are completed within
clinically appropriate timelines (under 24 hours). In 2023-24, the Government made an additional
investment to deliver more medical imaging services, which resulted in a total of over 595,800 CT
scans and over 255,200 MRI scans, an improvement of over 75,300 CT scans and 24,200 MRI
compared to 2022-23.

The ministry continued to implement a number of projects to manage costs, wait times, and
demand for CT and MRI scans across the province through the Diagnostic Imaging Action Plan. AHS
reached a five-year agreement with radiologist groups in Edmonton and Calgary to reduce wait
times and signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the three largest radiology providers in
Alberta’s North, Central, and South Zones to reduce wait times. The bilateral agreement on shared
health priorities also invested a $45 million in federal funding to increase the volume of MRI scans
and CT scans conducted so Albertans could get these important tests as part of their health care. In
August 2023, an agreement was reached between AHS and DynaLIFE to transfer staff, equipment,
and property in all regions of the province to AHS. Transition of remaining leases and contracts is
progressing as planned and is on track. All community laboratory operations and DynaLIFE
unionized employees transitioned to AHS-owned Alberta Public Laboratories (APL) on December
18, 2023. APL continues to add more workers and provides laboratory testing in all regions of
Alberta. Since the APL transition, patient wait times have consistently met or exceeded targets,
representing a 76 per cent reduction in wait times since the peak in May 2023. Access to available
appointments continues to improve with the average next available appointment in 5.4 days, with
no site over 18 days.

Increasing ICU capacity to ensure that Albertans receive care when they need it most remains a
major priority for the government. By adding more ICU capacity, Alberta’s health care system is
able to treat those who come into hospitals in a timely manner and respond to surges and pressures
caused by unforeseen events. In 2023-24, approximately $72 million was provided by the ministry
to continue supporting the 50 ICU beds created as part of the ICU Baseline Capacity Grant in 2022-


Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                     27
Results Analysis



23. The provincial total ICU capacity sits at 223. Since April 2023, 221 new, permanent non-ICU
beds were added by AHS, with an additional temporary surge beds open as needed to support
demand such as during respiratory season. As of September 2023, the overall permanent acute care
capacity increased to approximately 8,753 beds, up from 8,470 beds in 2019. Work will continue to
build flexibility in the health care system to ensure a resilient, sustainable, and accessible health
care system that meets the needs of Albertans.



1.2   Attract, recruit and retain health care professionals in order to build health system
      capacity and sustainability.

Government is working to address workforce challenges that impact Alberta’s health system
capacity. Alberta Health is now updating the Alberta Health Workforce Strategy, which sets out a
framework for supporting Alberta’s current health care workers and building a workforce to
support Albertans’ health needs now, and in the future. In 2023-24, Alberta Health continued to
implement the strategy; efforts included working with the Ministry of Advanced Education and
Alberta’s post-secondary institutions to explore options to expand the number of nursing student
seats, undergraduate medicine seats and post-graduate medical residency seats in Alberta’s
medical schools. In 2023-24, $158 million was invested for initiatives to train, recruit and retain
more health care professionals for Alberta, particularly for rural, remote and Indigenous areas.

In addition, Alberta Health collaborated with Advanced Education to increase post-secondary
training seats and the number of nursing student seats and expand capacity at medical schools to
educate and train more physicians. In 2023-24, Advanced Education began increasing nurse
bridging programs so internationally educated nurses (IENs) will have access to an additional 1,221
spaces at post-secondary institutions and can complete necessary programs for certification in
Alberta. In 2023-24, the number of undergraduate medical seats increased by 20: 10 additional
seats at the University of Alberta and 10 at the University of Calgary.

As part of initiatives to improve continuing care staffing capacity, the government continues to
prioritize actions to increase the number of students enrolled in Health Care Aide (HCA) programs
at various post-secondary institutions. Nearly $13 million was provided to post-secondary
institutions to support HCA students’ bursaries over three years (2023-2026). Demand for the HCA
bursaries is high, with over 1,500 students applying for the bursaries since implementation. In
2023-24, approximately 860 students were approved to receive a bursary. These bursaries remove
barriers for students and pay for schooling and other expenses while they complete the HCA
education program.

In April 2023, the College of Registered Nurses of Alberta (CRNA) streamlined licensure
requirements and processes for IENs and out‑of‑province nurses to help them join Alberta’s health
workforce faster. By streamlining the registration process, over 3,000 new IENs have been licensed
to work in Alberta. Alberta Health is now focused on supporting the newly licensed nurses by
working with the CRNA to understand the challenges they face and develop potential solutions,
including Alberta’s Nurse Navigator program that provides employment supports to affected
nurses. Further, Alberta Health is funding the Alberta Association of Nurses to implement the Nurse
Navigator program to support IENs with licensure and employment in Alberta; the program has
supported about 139 IENs as of March 31, 2024.

Alberta continued to support the Primary Care Network (PCN) Nurse Practitioner (NP) Support
Program, created to enable NPs to work to the full scope of their skills. The program increases
access to primary health care, including after hours, weekends, and in rural and remote areas and
underserved populations; supports chronic disease management; and helps meet unmet demand


28                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                    Results Analysis



for primary health care services using NPs. As of March 31, 2024, there were over 60 NP FTEs
funded through the PCN NP Support Program to improve access to primary health care in rural and
remote areas and for underserved populations to help meet unmet demand for services. In 2023-
24, the ministry focused on important priority areas for the program, including NP compensation,
recruitment and retention, and the desire of NPs for an independent practice model. On November
22, 2023, government announced a new NP Primary Care Program to provide public funding for
primary care services provided by NPs, adding much-needed capacity to Alberta’s primary care
system. As of March 31, 2024, a draft primary care compensation framework and program
parameters for the new NP primary care program were under development for a targeted
announcement in April 2024, which will provide compensation to NPs so that they can set up an
independent practice or partner with an existing clinic.

In 2023-24, Alberta Health signed an agreement with the Nurse Practitioner Association of Alberta
(NPAA) to provide grant funding of $2 million to support the adoption of the new NP program and
provide NPs the support needed for successful transition to independent practice. This support will
allow the NPAA to implement the NP program, recruit NPs, and provide supports as they work to
set up their own practice. Alberta Health will continue to collaborate with NPAA and the Alberta
Medical Association (AMA) to successfully launch the program.

The ministry is working with regulatory colleges to streamline the assessment and registration
processes for international medical graduates (IMGs) coming to Alberta. Alberta Health continued
to work with the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Alberta on a 5-year pilot that started in
January 2023 for an alternate pathway for licensing IMGs trained in the United States, South Africa,
Australia, New Zealand, Hong Kong, Singapore, Switzerland, Ireland and the United Kingdom.
Through this pilot, Alberta will attract more IMGs by accelerating the licensure process for IMGs
whose education and training are comparable to the Canadian standard. Since the pilot started, 176
physicians are in the registration process, with 19 already in practice. In 2023, the College initiated
the highest number of assessments of IMGs since 2017.

More physicians are now registered to practice in Alberta compared to previous years. As of
December 31, 2023, there were 11,738 physicians registered in Alberta, which was a net gain of
331 physicians, or a 2.9 per cent increase compared to the same period last year. There were 4,379
family medicine specialists and 1,277 non-specialists, for a total of 5,656 as well as 6,082 specialists
in Alberta. This represents an additional 135 family physicians (2.4 per cent increase) and 196
specialists (3.3 per cent increase) compared to December 31, 2022.

Performance Indicator 1.d
Number of registered physicians in Alberta


                                                    20191          2020            2021    2022           2023

  Number of registered physicians
                                                    10,948         11,120         11,153   11,407        11,738
  in Alberta
                                                        1
Source: College of Physicians and Surgeons of Alberta   Results based on calendar year




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                  29
Results Analysis



1.3   Strengthen and modernize Alberta’s primary health care system and implement
      innovations to ensure all Albertans have access to timely and appropriate primary
      health care services in the community.

A strong primary health care system is foundational for better health care for Albertans. Alberta’s
government is stabilizing and strengthening primary health care across the province so that
Albertans can access care no matter where they live. Alberta continues to take actions to improve
and strengthen access and quality of the primary health care system. In September 2022, the
Government of Alberta launched the Modernizing Alberta’s Primary Health Care System (MAPS)
initiative with health care leaders, Indigenous stakeholders and experts from across Canada and
around the world coming together to form the Strategic Advisory Panel and the Indigenous
Advisory Panel as part of the MAPS initiative.

On October 18, 2023, the MAPS Strategic Advisory Panel and Indigenous Advisory Panel final
reports were released to serve as guideposts for actions to strengthen primary health care and
improve access to timely, appropriate primary health care services across the province. The reports
identified immediate, medium- and long-term improvements to strengthen Alberta’s primary
health care system. The Strategic Advisory Panel’s final report contains 11 recommendations to
improve primary health care, with an emphasis on access to team-based care, integration between
primary health care and community care, and the foundation of a coordinated and accountable
primary health care system. The MAPS Indigenous Advisory Panel’s final report contains 22
recommendations under five themes: providing culturally safe and appropriate care; improving
access to timely, appropriate primary care; ensuring primary care services are integrated and
seamless; ensuring high quality services are available from an accountable, innovative and
sustainable primary health care system; and including First Nations, Métis and Inuit Peoples as
partners to achieve health and wellness goals.

Alberta’s government has begun implementation of the MAPS Strategic Advisory Panel’s
recommendations on immediate actions to address urgent pressures, help stabilize the primary
health care system, and increase access to the health care Albertans need. Budget 2023 invested
$243 million to develop new models of care and stabilize the primary care system to improve
primary health care for Albertans. This included early MAPS investments, the development of a new
NP program, PCN enrollee growth and PCN stabilization. More than half of the $243 million (51 per
cent or $125 million) is being invested over three years to implement recommendations from
MAPS. The recommendations are being implemented through a phased approach, with several
moving forward immediately, followed by medium- and longer-term improvements that will
enhance community-based primary health care across Alberta. The ministry also initiated
immediate actions identified in the Indigenous MAPS final report to improve access to culturally
safe primary health care programs and services. On December 20, 2023, an Indigenous Primary
Health Care Innovation Fund provided $20 million over two years to support primary health care
services designed and delivered by Indigenous communities.

A Comprehensive Care Task Force was struck to recommend a new payment model for family
physicians, supports for family physicians, ways to reduce the administrative workload for
providers, and other short-term stabilization measures. This includes the new NP program and
compensation model, which was announced in April 2024. A three-year, $57 million grant
agreement was also established with the AMA to support physician patient panel management. This
funding is being distributed to primary care physicians throughout the province to help address the
impact of administrative burdens by offsetting the cost of panel management and practice
improvement activities. It will also support family doctors and NPs to help manage costs related to
their increasing number of patients.




30                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                        Results Analysis



Finally, in December 2023, Alberta Health signed a bi-lateral agreement with the federal
government on shared health care priorities to improve access to high-quality family health
services, including in rural and remote areas, and for underserved communities. The agreement
will support team-based care for underserved populations, which will help to support
implementation of MAPS recommendations. The agreement included $2 million over the next three
fiscal years for a total of $6 million dollars (2023-24 to 2025-26) to support First Nations, Métis and
Inuit Peoples through the Indigenous MAPS initiative. Alberta Health will initiate the programs to
use this funding in 2024-25.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                     31
Results Analysis



Outcome Two: A modernized, safe, person-centered, high quality and resilient health
system that provides the most effective care now and in the future for each tax dollar
spent


Key Objectives

2.1   Implement strategies that ensure the sustainability of publicly funded pharmaceutical
      benefits.

Albertans want and deserve a health care system that meets their needs, while also recognizing the
system needs to be sustainable. Government’s focus on ensuring value for money spent on health
care supports this vision through actions and initiatives that make the most of taxpayer dollars.
Budget 2023 invested $24.5 billion in Health’s operating budget to keep Albertans safe and healthy.

Alberta signed a one-time Canada Health Transfer (CHT) top up agreement in principle in February
2023, and received $233 million in funding from the federal government during 2023-24, as part of
the $6 billion CHT from the Government of Canada. Alberta signed an additional bi-lateral
agreement in December 2023 with the federal government to work together to improve health care
for Canadians with funding of $285 million over the next three fiscal years (2023-24 to 2025-26). In
addition, Alberta signed the Aging with Dignity bi-lateral agreement in March 2024 for $627 million
to be funded over a five-year period (2023-24 to 2027-28) to support the shared priority of helping
people in Canada age with dignity close to home, with access to home care or with quality care in
continuing care homes.

The ministry continued to closely monitor provincial per capita spending on health care to assess
progress on government’s broader commitment to get the most value for each dollar spent on
health care services. The Government of Alberta collaborated with health system partners to
manage the biggest cost drivers in the health system – namely hospital services, labour and
physician compensation, and publicly funded drug benefit programs. In 2023-24, the Government
of Alberta spent $5.0 billion on hospital services (i.e., acute care), $6.4 billion on physician
compensation and development, and $2.8 billion on drugs and supplemental health benefits.

The performance indicator on the Alberta health care spending per capita versus comparator
provinces is used to monitor the financial resources used for health care for each person covered by
Alberta’s publicly funded health care system. This is a gauge of the fiscal sustainability and
efficiency of Alberta’s health system versus comparator provinces. Alberta’s provincial per capita
spending on health care in 2022-23 was estimated to be $5,476, which was lower than Canadian
average of $5,749. Further, Alberta’s per capita healthcare expenditures was lower than the
average of British Columbia, Ontario and Quebec ($5,748). Over the past five years, Alberta has
tempered the growth of spending, with average annual per capita spending growth lower than all
comparator provinces (British Columbia, Ontario and Quebec) as well as the national average (as
measured by the compounded annual growth rate). Improving the efficiency of health care delivery
will improve health outcomes and support the fiscal sustainability of the health system.




32                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                             Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 2.a
Alberta health care spending per capita vs comparator provinces (2022-23)


                                                           British       Ontario    Quebec          Average
                                            Alberta
                                                        Columbia (BC)     (ON)       (QC)         (BC, ON, QC)
    Health spending per capita (2022-23)     $5,476        $ 5,808       $ 5,330    $ 6,107          $5,748

    Difference (versus average)             $ (272)          $ 60        $ (418)     $ 358

    Population (in millions)                  4.6            5.4           15.3       8.7

    Total health spending difference
                                            $ (1.24)        $ 0.32       $ (6.39)   $ 3.13
    versus average (in billions)
Source: Statistics Canada

Prescription drugs provide benefit for improving quality of life, managing illnesses, and, in some
cases, precluding the need for more extensive treatments. With this in mind, Alberta’s government
continued to build on its existing drug benefit programs to address gaps in drug coverage and the
sustainability of public drug programs in a way that works for Albertans. The province continued to
improve existing drug benefit programs and add innovative and effective therapies through the
addition of 372 new products. Of the new products added, 59 were brand name drug products and
313 were generic products.

Alberta continued to work on approaches to reduce prescription drug costs, including expanding
access to life-saving drugs, leveraging price negotiations for all new drugs, implementing the new
pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) generics agreement and extending the Retina Anti-
Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Program for Intraocular Disease (RAPID) program:

     As of December 2023, Alberta expanded access to Trikafta to children aged two to five years.
      With this expansion, Alberta was among the first of the provinces in Canada to provide access to
      this life-saving drug for patients with cystic fibrosis aged two years and older.
     Alberta implemented the new agreement between the pCPA and the Canadian Generic
      Pharmaceutical Association for a three-year pricing initiative for generic drugs that took effect
      on October 1, 2023. The agreement allows the price of new single-source generic drugs to
      automatically drop to 55 per cent of the name brand reference price after three months from
      the start of public funding in a participating jurisdiction. This is estimated to save Alberta more
      than $100 million over three years.
     The government continued to leverage price negotiations between the pCPA and drug
      manufacturers for all new drugs, with rebates increased to an estimated $432 million in 2023-
      24 from $327 million in 2022-23, demonstrating the ongoing success of the pCPA and Alberta’s
      commitment as a member to push health jurisdictions for more value and budgetary protection.
     Alberta also extended the RAPID program, which is estimated to save approximately $100
      million per year.

Alberta continued to support the biosimilars initiative to replace biologic drugs with their clinically
proven, lower-cost alternatives whenever possible so patients in Alberta continued to receive safe
and effective treatment at a lower price. In 2023-24, savings from this initiative were estimated at
approximately $34.5 million. While no new biosimilars were added in 2023-24, the existing
15 biosimilar products under the initiative were added to the Alberta Drug Benefit List, thus
expanding coverage options for patients. Alberta Health is also currently working with other



Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                          33
Results Analysis



provinces and territories on an approach that best leverages federal funding as part of a national
strategy for drugs for rare diseases.

The Government of Alberta continues to support initiatives aimed at expanding access to pharmacy
services, including access to convenient and accessible pharmacy services through community-
based pharmacy care clinics. Alberta Health engaged the Alberta Pharmacists’ Association - RxA
and Alberta Blue Cross to identify pharmacies that self-identified as pharmacist-led clinics and
engaged researchers at the University of Alberta to understand the types of services and patient
needs addressed at pharmacist-led clinics. This work is expected to support a better understanding
of how to improve access to community pharmacy services for Albertans.

The ministry also made strategic capital investments to renovate pharmacies and consolidated and
centralized drug production in the province to meet current standards. In 2023-24, almost $36.5
million was spent on the construction of a 63,000 square-foot Provincial Pharmacy Central Drug
Production and Distribution Centre. Located in northwest Edmonton, the facility will be responsible
for mixing and packaging medication for local health centres. The project is on time and on budget,
with the design development report and full construction plan completed in September 2023.
Budget 2023 also invested $54 million over three years to support the National Association of
Pharmacy Regulatory Authorities’ program to renovate and upgrade 33 pharmacies operating in 20
Alberta Health Services (AHS) facilities in 11 communities across the province. As of March 31,
2024, AHS has been provided with grant funding of $14 million to implement these improvements.

As part of the transition of COVID-19 to an endemic state and to align with the fees for other
publicly funded vaccines, the fee for pharmacist administration of the COVID-19 vaccine decreased
from $25 to $17 per dose as of January 1, 2024, and subsequently to $13 per dose on April 1, 2024.
The government also removed the COVID-19 assessment fee on October 1, 2023, as this service was
no longer needed outside of a public health emergency.

As of March 2024, the Ukrainian Evacuee Alberta Health Benefit has provided supplementary
health benefits coverage to over 43,000 Ukrainian evacuees. The Health Benefit program provides
premium- and co-payment-free coverage for supplementary benefits including prescription and
non-prescription drugs, essential diabetic supplies, eye exams and glasses, dental care, and
emergency ambulance services. In addition, Ukrainian evacuees have benefited from the Ukrainian
Evacuee Temporary Health Benefits Program, established in March 2022, which provides publicly
funded health insurance coverage for medically necessary physician and hospital services, as well
as some dental and oral surgical health services in Alberta. As of March 26, 2024, 52,819 Ukrainian
evacuees were receiving public health insurance coverage through the Temporary Benefits
Program.

2.2   Assess the effectiveness of health care institutions including the HQCA and AHS to
      improve health care delivery and health care outcomes while managing costs.

The Government of Alberta remains committed to controlling the rising costs of health care while
providing Albertans with the health care services they expect and deserve. The ministry continued
to work collaboratively with health system partners to strike a balance between fiscal restraint and
the investment required to support economic growth and a world-class health care system, with
the capacity to respond to emerging public health challenges.

On November 8, 2023, the government announced efforts to refocus Alberta’s health care system to
prioritize patient care and empower frontline health care workers, including those serving rural,
remote and Indigenous communities, to deliver the highest quality health care. The refocused
health care system will improve patient outcomes and access through the creation of sector-based
health organizations for acute care, continuing care, mental health and addiction and primary care


34                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                        Results Analysis



within a single, unified provincial health care system. The provincial acute care organization will
oversee the delivery of acute care including care delivered in all hospitals, urgent care centres, and
chartered surgical facilities; emergency medical services; and cancer care. The provincial
continuing care organization will provide provincial oversight and coordination of service delivery
across the spectrum of continuing care, including continuing care homes and home and community
care. The provincial primary care organization will coordinate primary health care services and
provide transparent provincial oversight. The Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction will oversee
the mental health and addiction organization.

As part of the refocused health care system, an integration council will be formed to ensure system
alignment, identify efficiencies, remove barriers and make sure the system is delivering seamless
patient care. Alberta Health Services (AHS) will continue to have a strong role in the refocused
system by concentrating on delivering acute care services. There will also be 12 regional advisory
councils and a new Indigenous Advisory Council to enable greater emphasis on local decision-
making.

In 2023-24, over $13.3 million was spent on health care system refocusing efforts. The ministry
launched a comprehensive engagement process that included telephone and virtual town halls,
online feedback forms and one of the largest in-person public engagement projects in government
history. As of March 31, 2024, 55 engagement sessions were completed, with a total of 2,658
participants providing feedback. Approximately 18,000 responses were submitted through an
online feedback portal as of March 31, 2024. Ten additional sessions are scheduled in April 2024
and information gathering sessions with Indigenous communities began in April 2024.

As part of the refocusing initiative, in fall 2023 Alberta Health conducted an initial assessment of
the current operating models for each health sector and what functions are needed to support the
new health sector organizations. This included a detailed review of AHS’ key functions,
accountabilities, and expenditures in order to determine its most appropriate alignment in the
refocused system, including the transfer of some current AHS functions to the new sector-based
health organizations. Alberta Health also initiated preliminary work to support the creation of the
primary care, continuing care and acute care organizations with efforts accelerating in the next
fiscal year. Work is also ongoing to implement legislative amendments to support the refocused
health care system. Efforts to launch the primary care, continuing care, and acute care
organizations will continue in 2024-25.

As of March 31, 2024, Alberta Health has initiated work to support the creation of the new advisory
councils and Indigenous Advisory Council to be established in 2024-25. This included engaging
with the existing health advisory councils under AHS, led by the Parliamentary Secretary for Rural
Health, to understand current challenges. Ten of 12 sessions were completed as of March 31, 2024.

Establishing a framework for performance monitoring and assessment will be an important
component of enhanced accountability and oversight for the refocused health care system. Alberta
Health engaged with the Health Quality Council of Alberta (HQCA) to initiate the development of a
Health System Framework that will define a common vision for quality and guide the selection of
indicators, standards, and targets for system performance. When completed, the framework will
serve as a foundation to enhance accountability for monitoring and improving quality, performance
and value across a refocused health care system.

Health care infrastructure plays an important role in providing access to quality health care
services and improving health outcomes. Protecting Alberta’s health care system requires
investments in health care infrastructure to improve efficiency, reduce wait-times, and provide
additional surgical capacity to improve patient outcomes. Alberta Health continues to expand and
modernize hospitals and other facilities to ensure an accessible and modernized health care system.


Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                       35
Results Analysis



In 2023-24, approximately $735 million was spent on health-related capital projects across the
province to expand and modernize hospitals and other facilities to protect quality health care and
grow system capacity, including technology and information systems maintenance and
enhancements to existing facilities.

Almost $20 million was spent on the Red Deer Regional Hospital Centre (RDRHC) redevelopment
project to improve critical services and capacity at one of the province’s busiest hospitals. The
schematic design for the new inpatient tower and renovation of the RDRHC’s main building was
released March 14, 2023. The hospital redevelopment is on schedule and on budget. The next stage
of the project, design development, is now underway and construction is anticipated to start in
2024. The procurement process has started with a Request for Qualifications released in January
2024 for the ambulatory care building, which will be constructed through a public-private
partnership (P3) approach and will be located adjacent to the surface parkade. Once complete, the
expansion of RDRHC will add 200 beds to the existing facility, bringing the total number of beds to
570 from 370; and will add new operating rooms, Medical Device Reprocessing department, cardiac
catheterization labs; and renovations to areas in the main building, including the emergency
department.

The ministry is resetting the capital planning priorities for the Edmonton region, including building
smaller, purpose-built facilities that can be developed quickly. Several planning projects are
underway in Edmonton and surrounding areas, including the redevelopment of the Royal
Alexandra Hospital and expansion of the Strathcona Community Hospital. Alberta’s government is
steadfast in its commitment to build a new, stand-alone Stollery Children’s Hospital in Edmonton. A
new facility would provide more beds, larger clinical spaces, more private rooms, and dedicated
areas for children and their families and ensure that as the province’s population continues to grow,
children in Edmonton and northern Alberta would have access to the specialized care they need.

In December 2022, the Arthur J.E. Child Comprehensive Cancer Centre (Calgary Cancer Centre) was
turned over to AHS for operational commissioning. In 2023-24, operational commissioning
activities, including installing equipment and furniture, and training staff, continued to prepare the
hospital for clinical services and begin treating patients later in 2024. The hospital has 160
inpatient beds, 100 patient exam rooms, 100 chemotherapy chairs, increased space for clinical
trials, 12 radiation vaults and outpatient cancer clinics. There are also designated areas for clinical
and operational support services and research laboratories. Once operational, the facility will
increase cancer care capacity in Calgary by consolidating and expanding existing services to
support integrated and comprehensive cancer care.

Budget 2023 invested $56 million over three years for a Cyclotron Facility in Calgary. In 2023-24,
the schematic design for the Cyclotron facility in Calgary was completed. The project remains on
budget and on schedule.

The ministry continued working with the Alberta Medical Association (AMA) to manage spending
growth and modernize physician funding models through the implementation of the AMA
Agreement. A key focus in 2023-24 was to fully implement the recently negotiated agreement with
increased funding provided to physicians in rural communities, increased funding for physician
recruitment and retention and a review of rural physician compensation. Several items outlined
within the agreement have been successfully implemented, including retroactive payments for
physicians providing rural service. Virtual care mental health service code enhancements that allow
physicians to provide additional virtual care went live on January 24, 2024, with over
242,200 claims and approximately $28.3 million spent. Eligible physicians can now bill the new and
updated health service codes in the Schedule of Medical Benefits. An updated “Good Faith” billing
policy also went live on February 6, 2024, which supports physician claims processes for situations
where patients may not be able to provide conventional proof of residency or registration under


36                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                           Results Analysis



the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan. Approximately $16 million annually - or about $4 million
over the last quarter of 2023-24 - has been provided for this initiative through the bi-lateral
agreement with the federal government to improve health care for Canadians.

2.3   Modernizing the digital health system for Albertans and health care providers.

Alberta’s health care system is shifting from a provider- to patient-centric model and more
Albertans now rely on accessing on-demand virtual government services. To enable this shift
towards a patient-centered health system, the Government of Alberta is making considerable
investments to modernize Alberta’s digital health system. This will simplify how patients and
citizens interact with the health care system, enable patients to access their health information,
empower the patient’s care team with on-demand information and decision support tools and,
enrich Alberta Netcare (Alberta’s Electronic Health Record) with robust, meaningful patient
information. Part of Alberta’s digital health initiatives include efforts to integrate the Electronic
Medical Record (EMR) systems of community providers with AHS’ Connect Care and other
provincial assets.

MyHealth Records (MHR), a portal that allows Albertans to access their health information, is one of
the important elements of the digital modernization of the health care system, along with Alberta
Netcare and Connect Care. Alberta Netcare is available to health care professionals in the
community and AHS facilities. Connect Care is an integrated system with Alberta Netcare that
serves as a common platform for clinical information and stores all medical records, prescriptions
and care history collected from AHS facilities, including doctor's notes.

In 2023-24, the government expanded access to MHR to allow Albertans to access their health
information included with Alberta Netcare. This means Albertans now have access to more of their
health information, which enables them to be active participants with their care team in the
management of their health. MHR further enhances individuals' access to their personal health
information through inclusion of some laboratory test results. As of March 31, 2024, there were
over 1.7 million MHR users, with an average daily login of 25,000 users. MHR will continue to
empower Albertans on their health journey within a person-centred health care model.

The ministry also made progress on a phased roll out of Connect Care within all AHS facilities to
support digital modernization of the health system. In 2023-24, two planned launches for the
Connect Care project were completed (for a total of seven out of nine), which improves integration
of health information in AHS to support the care of AHS patients. Connect Care provides a single
source of information within AHS to support team-based, integrated care, with a focus on the
patient and the efficient and effective provision of health care services. In 2023-24, $159.4 million
(operating and capital) was spent on Connect Care. The total cost of Connect Care when completed
is expected to be approximately $1.47 billion. A full implementation of Connect Care is expected in
2024-25, with the final two launches scheduled for May and November 2024. Once fully launched,
Connect Care will serve as a key information technology asset in the delivery of care in the
province’s refocused health system.

The ministry also made significant progress toward the implementation of the Alberta Digital
Strategy and Alberta Health’s eHealth Strategy, which was developed in 2022 to modernize digital
service delivery, increase productivity, save tax dollars, and improve user experience by better
integrating technologies into the delivery of government services. Alberta Health continued to
deploy Alberta Netcare access to community providers. As of March 31, 2024, over
2,780 community clinics and 1,670 community pharmacies were using Alberta Netcare, resulting in
more clinical information available at point of care leading to better clinical decision-making. In
2023-24, Alberta enhanced the Alberta Netcare clinician experience by enabling additional features,
such as the Alberta Netcare Patient Event History. This provided value to over 44,000 clinician


Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                        37
Results Analysis



users of Alberta Netcare by allowing easier access to clinical information to inform decision-
making.

As part of digital modernization efforts and to facilitate better integration and improve
productivity, 69 new data sources were added to Alberta Netcare from clinics across the province
in 2023-24 using the provincial Health Information Exchange. This included new clinics sharing
clinical reports such as diagnostic images and reports, cardiology, pulmonary function, lab results,
community patient encounters, and consult reports. This has increased integration between the
primary care systems and Alberta Netcare.

In addition, work continued on the Community Information Integration (CII) project to improve
Albertans’ access to primary care and community health information. Patient data from physician
offices and other community-based clinics is made available to other health care providers through
Alberta Netcare. The CII project expanded sharing of identified patient health information from
community EMRs to Alberta Netcare. As of March 31, 2024, over 600 clinics and 2,671 physician
practitioners provided patient data gathered in the community to Alberta Netcare. Approximately 2
million residents have a Clinical Encounter Digest (a report summarizing care the patient has
received over the past 12 months from all community-based clinics participating in CII) in their
Alberta Netcare Record and about 16 million patient encounters have been submitted to Alberta
Netcare. This increases the integration between primary care systems and Alberta Netcare, thereby
expanding the availability of clinical data.

In 2023-24, Alberta also expanded the use of the Central Patient Attachment Registry (CPAR),
which captures the confirmed relationship of a primary provider and their paneled patients
(patients who have seen the provider in the past 18 months). As of March 2024, over 1.8 million
Albertans were confirmed to have seen their primary health care provider through CPAR. As of
March 31, 2024, approximately $6 million in grant funding has been provided to the AMA through
the CII and CPAR Acceleration Program to provide financial incentives to clinicians to participate in
the CII Program. Alberta has also integrated an initial three First Nations clinics with CII/CPAR to
capture patient panels, with the clinics starting to submit automated panels.

The ministry is also supporting the Alberta Vaccine Booking System (AVBS) as part of its digital
modernization, allowing Albertans to book vaccine appointments more effectively. To date,
1.78 million Albertans have registered and almost 2.3 million appointments have been booked
through the system. In 2023-24, over 261,343 appointments were booked, and 41,253 new
registrations were added in AVBS. The ministry also supported the modernization of Alberta
Health’s provincial drug information system (DIS) in 2023-24. Enabling 932 community
pharmacies to be connected to the DIS in real-time contributed over 40 million dispense records to
Alberta Netcare. This enhancement allows for the immediate communication of medication
information for clinical care by authorized clinicians.

Alberta Health continued to update and enhance its legacy health information systems as there are
increasingly more complex data demands. Alberta Health successfully completed a project enabling
the province of Quebec to use a secure file transfer account for electronic submission of claim
adjustment requests and reports related to out of province health services, allowing for more
efficient public health benefits management between Alberta and Quebec. This project replaces the
existing paper-based exchange system, leading to a reduction in associated issues while
streamlining the process. Additional data integrated into claim files from the Workers’
Compensation Board (WCB) to Alberta Health enables the Claims Management team to efficiently
and effectively identify duplicate claims submitted by health practitioners. This enhancement
provides quicker identification of claims for work-related injuries paid by Alberta Health and
increases the recovery of public funds mistakenly paid to practitioners for claims covered by WCB.



38                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                        Results Analysis



2.4   Ensure processes for resolving patient concerns are effective, streamlined, and
      consistent across the province.

The ministry is committed to ensuring that the patient complaints process is fair, responsive and
accessible and that processes are in place to review and respond to feedback from patients and
families. AHS continues to make targeted improvements to its patient complaint management
process.

The ministry continued to expand the mandate and role of the Health Advocate to guide Albertans
through the complaints resolution process and provide clear and accessible public information and
education supports. In 2023-24, 14 new FTEs were approved and hired for the Office of the Alberta
Health Advocate (OAHA) and Mental Health Patient Advocate (MHPA) to expand the complaints
and concerns triage and navigation support for patients, and to prepare to implement patient-
centred improvements to the patient complaints process.

The ministry also made progress on the implementation of the recommendations of the HQCA
review to improve patient-centred accountability and public reporting, including standardized
follow-up for patient complaints and mandatory information exchange requirements. Alberta
Health collaborated with the OAHA and MHPA to engage key stakeholders in assessing the
feasibility of the HQCA recommendations for improving patient complaints. The engagement
identified critical success factors, including technology requirements, for implementing a new
model for patient complaints and mandatory information exchange in alignment with the
refocusing of the health system. This work will continue in 2024-25.

Work is underway to better address patient complaints from Indigenous Peoples through the
creation of an Indigenous Patient Complaints Investigator and Elders Roster. The Investigator will
act as a conduit to support Indigenous patients and their families in addressing negative
experiences when accessing health care in Alberta. The Elders Roster, which will be comprised of
Elders selected by the Indigenous Patient Navigators, will work with Indigenous patients and
families to seek the appropriate cultural and social supports required during their health care
journey. The ministry initiated recruitment of the Indigenous Patient Complaints Investigator
within the Office of the Alberta Health Advocate to provide support to Indigenous patients who
experience perceived harm or racism when accessing health care services.



2.5   Work with the Ministry of Technology and Innovation to create health spending
      accounts for non-publicly funded or non-insured expenses.

Alberta Health continues to work closely with the Ministry of Technology and Innovation, who is
the lead Ministry on this project, to explore the feasibility of establishing Health Spending Accounts
(HSA). Ongoing work includes the exploration of program feasibility, viability, the scope of services,
program eligibility, program benefits and financial implications.

If implemented, the new Alberta HSA will provide additional funding to Albertans to help pay for
goods and services not covered by the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan and will contribute to a
system-wide shift towards patient-centred, preventative care to empower Albertans with their own
health and wellness with the goal of increasing quality of life and improving health outcomes for all
Albertans. HSAs can help bridge gaps in current health system performance and enable Albertans to
take a more active and participatory role in prioritizing and funding the health services of their
choosing.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                     39
Results Analysis



Alberta’s government will provide Albertans with more information about the HSA, once further
details become available.

2.6   Increase oversight to improve safety while reducing red tape within the health system
      by streamlining processes and reducing duplication.

Government continues to implement measures to reduce red tape, where appropriate, in the health
care system, while ensuring the health and safety of Albertans. This includes restructuring and
modernizing health legislation by removing unnecessary requirements to improve service
accessibility and better support the health care needs of Albertans. In 2023-24, the ministry
continued to streamline health delivery processes, where appropriate, to improve efficiency and
save time and resources.

As of March 31, 2024, the ministry, including Alberta Health and AHS, achieved an over 36 per cent
reduction in its regulatory and administrative requirements. The ongoing launches of Connect Care
by AHS across the organization continued to drive the reduction in burdensome administrative
requirements in 2023-24.

In 2023-24, two planned launches for the Connect Care project were completed (for a total of seven
out of nine), which improves integration of health information in AHS to support care of AHS
patients. Connect Care supports digital modernization of more complete central access to patient
information related to AHS services. It provides resources, including medication alerts; evidence-
based order sets; test and treatment suggestions; and, care paths and best practice advisories,
which result in fewer repeated tests and consistent information across the province where care is
being provided at AHS facilities. This system also reduces the number of forms used by AHS and
helps to eliminate data entry duplication.

Connect Care also facilitates direct communication between patients and AHS health care providers
through a patient portal, MyAHS Connect, which helps patients better manage their health with
online access to their health information, including reports and test results. It also allows for online
interaction with their care team, an ability to review and manage appointments and after visit care
summaries, and less repeating of their health histories or the need to remember complex histories
or medication lists.

On December 7, 2023, the Public Health Act received Royal Assent and came into force. The Act
clarifies decision-making processes during a public health emergency, outlining the roles and
accountabilities of Cabinet and medical officers of health in any future declared state of public
health emergency.

Further, Alberta Health changed the listing status for three medications: dapagliflozin, apixaban and
rivaroxaban, used for diabetes or cardiovascular disease, from step therapy/special authorization
to regular (open) benefit. This change removed the requirement for physicians to submit special
authorization forms and expedited access for patients for these important therapies. The renewal
criteria period for biosimilars and multiple sclerosis drugs was changed from one to two years. This
change reduces burden on physicians and patients and provides more time for follow-ups and
testing while maintaining treatment.

As part of the MAPS initiative, a Comprehensive Primary Care Task Force was created and included
an Administrative Burden Working Group, jointly led by the AMA and the Alberta College of Family
Physicians. The Working Group developed an interim report titled “Decreasing Administrative
Burden” that identifies several recommendations to streamline requirements and reduce




40                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                    Results Analysis



duplication for health professionals and service providers. These recommendations will be
reviewed as part of the MAPS implementation plan in 2024-25.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                 41
Results Analysis



Outcome Three: The health and well-being of all Albertans is protected, supported and
improved, and health inequities among population groups are reduced


Key Objectives

3.1   Safeguard Albertans from communicable diseases that can cause severe outcomes.

Alberta remains committed to safeguarding the health and well-being of its residents through
proactive measures to prevent the spread of communicable diseases. The ministry works to protect
Albertans from a number of communicable diseases, such as influenza, measles, and sexually
transmitted and blood borne infections (STBBI). Immunization programs for vaccine-preventable
diseases continued to be a primary strategy in preventing disease, disease transmission and severe
health outcomes. They are key to the health of a population and to decreasing the strain on the
acute care system.

The ministry collaborated with AHS to increase childhood immunization rates as well as
pharmacists and physicians to promote initiatives that aim to improve access to influenza vaccine
and adult immunization rates. Alberta offered annual influenza immunizations to Albertans six
months of age and older free of charge, as well as the COVID-19 vaccine, which continues to be
available.

The Alberta Outreach Program started the week of October 2, 2023, to immunize Albertans at
highest risk of severe outcomes from influenza and COVID-19. The 2023-24 Influenza
Immunization Program for the public began on October 16, 2023, and ended on March 31, 2024.
Albertans had access to influenza and COVID-19 vaccines at more than 2,000 sites across the
province, including AHS clinics, Indigenous Services Canada clinics, community pharmacies,
community medical clinics, and post-secondary institutions. Influenza vaccine and COVID-19
appointments continued to be made accessible by Albertans through the Alberta Vaccine Booking
System. The overall influenza immunization rate in 2023-24 was 25 per cent, which was three per
cent lower than in 2022-23. As of March 31, 2024, 25 per cent of all Albertans had received the
influenza vaccine, with the highest rate (65 per cent) in those 75 years of age and older. Similarly,
as of March 31, 2024, 17 per cent of all Albertans had received a COVID-19 vaccine, with the highest
rate (56 per cent) in those 75 years of age and older. As of March 31, 2024, approximately 59 per
cent of Albertans 65 years of age and older, and 72 per cent of Albertans 90 years of age and older
received a high-dose influenza vaccine.

Alberta’s immunization programs for childhood diseases continue to be a primary strategy in
preventing disease, disease transmission and severe health outcomes. The ministry prioritized
immunization to prevent vaccine preventable diseases such as measles, mumps, rubella, chicken
pox, diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis (whooping cough), polio, human papillomavirus, meningococcal
and pneumococcal. Alberta continued to offer provincially funded vaccines to support the
administration of routine infant, preschool, and school immunization programs.

In 2023, by age two, 71 per cent of Albertans had received immunization with the diphtheria,
tetanus, pertussis, polio, Haemophilus influenzae type b (DTaP-IPV-Hib) vaccine and 82 per cent
had received immunization with the measles, mumps, rubella (MMR) vaccine. These immunization
rates are both lower than the national target of 95 per cent for these vaccines. Overall, childhood
immunization rates in Alberta have been declining over the last three years partly due to the
COVID-19 response, vaccine misinformation and vaccine fatigue between 2021 and 2023. AHS
implemented a catch-up program to increase childhood immunization rates, including reminder
calls for booked appointments, monitoring wait times, adding appointments as needed, and


42                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                        Results Analysis



following up using a recall process. AHS also hired additional staff to address the school
immunization backlog, ensuring the immunization rates for school-aged children were nearing pre-
pandemic coverage levels. Funding for these additional staff was in place until March 2024.

In July 2023, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) initiated enhanced surveillance and
screening of Dadaab refugees arriving in Canada due to an outbreak of circulating vaccine-derived
poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) in the Dadaab refugee complex in Kenya. As of March 31, 2024, more
than 79 refugees arrived in Alberta and AHS implemented the PHAC risk assessment protocols. No
cases of polio were identified in Canada. PHAC reassessed the risk in January 2024 and
subsequently recommended a phased approach to scale down the national response starting in
March 2024, with the goal of discontinuing the measures in November 2024.

A significant increase in measles outbreak activity was reported worldwide in 2023 and continues
into 2024 due in part to a decline in measles immunizations during the pandemic. Alberta Health
collaborated with key public health stakeholders to update the ministry’s Public Health Disease
Management Guideline for measles and developed a measles framework to guide the provincial
response for public health management of cases, contacts, and outbreaks. One case of measles was
reported in Alberta in 2023 in an unimmunized person who had travelled to an area where measles
was circulating. AHS conducted a robust public health investigation, and no secondary cases were
identified.

An outbreak of pertussis was declared in January 2023 in the South Zone (southern Alberta). Since
then, cases of pertussis have been reported in all AHS zones and all zones have declared an
outbreak at some point in the last 12 months. The provincial incidence rate of pertussis has
increased from 0.29 per 100,000 population in 2022 to 19.3 per 100 000 population in 2023, with
the number of reported cases varying from a high of 288 cases in the South Zone to a low of four
cases in the Edmonton Zone. The reported cases were predominantly individuals who were under
or unimmunized, with about 65.8 per cent of the cases in the under 10 years of age group. There
were 28 cases hospitalized between January 2023 and February 2024; however, no deaths have
been reported during this outbreak. In August 2023, AHS established the Provincial Pertussis
Coordinating Committee (PPCC) to respond to the increase in reported pertussis cases and ensured
collaboration and coordination to limit further spread. The PPCC consists of representatives from
the ministry, First Nations and Inuit Health Branch and the Alberta Provincial Laboratories and will
continue to work on a communications plan to raise pertussis awareness across the province.

In fall 2023, Alberta faced its most significant E. coli O157:H7 outbreak to date, impacting
18 daycares in the AHS Calgary Zone. As of November 22, 2023, a total of 1,604 children were
impacted by the outbreak, with 358 laboratory confirmed cases and 90 probable cases. Alberta
Health worked closely with other federal and provincial government ministries, including the
Canadian Food Inspection Agency, Alberta Agriculture and Irrigation, and AHS in the management
and investigation of the outbreak. In response to the outbreak, the Government of Alberta
appointed an external panel, the Food Safety and Licensed Facility-Based Child Care Review Panel,
to review respective legislation, regulation and inspection policies for areas that could be
strengthened to protect the health and safety of Alberta’s children in licensed child care facilities.
The Panel will submit a final report to the Ministers of Health and Jobs, Economy, and Trade in late
spring 2024 with recommendations to enhance food safety in Alberta’s licensed child care facilities
and licensed food service establishments that supply food for children in those facilities. The
Panel’s final report will be supported by information collected from formal public and targeted
stakeholder engagement conducted by Alberta Health and a third-party vendor between March 22
and April 25, 2024. Engagement activities included a public engagement survey, virtual and in-
person round table discussions with affected childcare providers and affected families, and invited
written submissions from subject matter experts including the Canadian Institute of Public Health



Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                     43
Results Analysis



Inspectors, the Canadian Society of Nutrition Management and the O’Brien Institute of Public
Health.

A Shigella outbreak was officially declared in Edmonton on September 8, 2022, and initially ended
on February 16, 2023, following two weeks of no new cases. However, due to the number of cases
confirmed shortly thereafter, the outbreak was reopened in March 2023. As of March 31, 2024, a
total of 382 cases have been reported since the outbreak started in September 2022, which
included the 167 cases reported in 2023-24. There have been 261 hospitalizations and no deaths
reported since the outbreak began. Alberta Health continues to participate on the Shigella Outbreak
Task Force, which includes cross-sector representation from Alberta Health, AHS, shelters, inner-
city agencies, the City of Edmonton, local family physicians and Alberta Precision Laboratories
(APL) to coordinate resources and discuss options to limit the spread of Shigella. Also, in
collaboration with federal, provincial and territorial partners, PHAC has incorporated culture-
independent diagnostic tests into case definitions for some enteric (gastrointestinal) diseases as
part of routine surveillance and reporting. These tests can rapidly detect organisms such as
shigellosis and shiga toxin-producing E. coli to facilitate prompt and timely identification and
management of cases and contacts. Alberta Health and APL actively participated in developing the
updated national case definitions that were published in January 2024.

Alberta’s goal remains to decrease the number of syphilis cases and eliminate congenital syphilis.
By monitoring rates of syphilis and congenital syphilis, Alberta is able to support program planning
and resource allocation, including improving access to testing, treatment and better prenatal care
for vulnerable pregnant women. In 2023, the rate of infectious syphilis per 100,000 population was
57.9 and the rate of congenital syphilis per 100,000 live births in Alberta was 122.1, which were
lower than the rates in 2022. This decrease may be attributed to a number of factors including,
more general awareness of the outbreak, focused work done by AHS to support testing and
treatment, and the efforts of community-based organizations. The ministry continued to work with
several service providers to enhance testing, treatment and prevention strategies to reduce
barriers to testing and treatment of STBBIs, increase access to prenatal syphilis screening and
support prevention strategies.

Alberta Health announced the Syphilis Outbreak Action Response grant program to fund
community-based organizations for initiatives that focus on the prevention, testing and treatment
of syphilis. In 2023-24, eight projects were approved, and seven of them received a total of
$1.8 million in funding to support increased awareness of syphilis and sexual well-being, increase
testing for syphilis, improve access to culturally safe care and management for syphilis, and address
congenital syphilis. The eighth project is awaiting approval later in 2024. Alberta Health also
updated the Interim Sexually Transmitted Infections Outbreak Screening Guidelines in December
2023 to clarify guidance for health practitioners when assessing risk and ordering appropriate
laboratory tests for sexually transmitted infections, including syphilis. AHS has been working on
initiatives to increase syphilis awareness, including a provincial webinar for primary care
providers. In addition, syphilis and congenital syphilis information, as well as testing and treatment,
was incorporated into a variety of public health centres, birth control clinics, sexual and
reproductive health programs, and maternal and child health programs. Alberta Health continued
to support the roll out of novel Point-of-Care Testing for syphilis/HIV to facilitate more rapid
diagnosis and treatment.

Further, in 2023-24, Alberta Health provided $9.7 million to organizations for community-based
prevention, identification and treatment of STBBIs and wrap-around supports for people living
with those infections, including almost $3 million specifically for responding to the syphilis
outbreak. In the first six months of 2023-24, STBBIs programs provided services to over 50,000
unique individuals and provided intensive wrap around supports to approximately 517 individuals
living with a STBBI. More than 10,000 STBBI tests conducted resulted in approximately five per


44                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                        Results Analysis



cent of those individuals tested being supported through treatment services. Approximately
2,600 referrals were provided to mental health and addiction recovery oriented supports, and over
1,500 individuals were supported with access other health services. In addition, 1,950 community
members received STBBI awareness and prevention education, and a total of 64 training initiatives
were provided to over 1,152 health professionals and service providers including sessions on
working with vulnerable populations, addressing stigma, the syphilis outbreak and HIV.



3.2   Improve access to health services in remote and rural communities by attracting,
      recruiting and retaining health professionals in these communities and modernizing
      critical capabilities in the delivery of health care services.

The Government of Alberta understands the unique health workforce challenges that impact the
delivery of safe, high-quality and sustainable health care services in rural and remote communities.
Making sure Alberta’s rural and remote communities have the doctors and nurses they need to
support the health care system is a priority for the government. In 2023-24, the Government of
Alberta spent $158 million on initiatives to educate, recruit, and retain health care professionals,
particularly for rural areas. These initiatives included rural physician education programs; financial
incentives for rural physicians such as the Rural Remote Northern Program and the Rural Health
Professions Action Plan (RhPAP); targeted recruitment of internationally educated nurses; and,
initiatives under the Alberta Medical Association (AMA) Agreement.

Alberta Health worked with the College of Registered Nurses of Alberta (CRNA) to streamline
registration processes for internationally educated nurses (IENs) and developed a grant agreement
with the Alberta Association of Nurses for nurse navigators to support IENs going through the
assessment, education, and registration processes. As of March 31, 2024, CRNA has licensed an
additional 1,669 IENs educated in the Philippines to support the Memorandum of Understanding
between the Government of Alberta and the Philippine Government. In 2023-24, Alberta Health
provided AHS with approximately $7 million in grants for global recruitment of nurses. AHS has
hired more than 360 nurses, over 40 of whom have arrived in Alberta and are joining our nursing
workforce, with the majority recruited to rural sites. The remaining IENs are in various stages of
immigration and are expected to arrive in Alberta in 2024. These nurses are employed in hard-to-
recruit sites, thereby increasing access to health care in rural and remote areas of the province. A
major challenge was the lack of accommodation in most communities. AHS has begun to provide
temporary accommodation for some of these IENs in hotels until housing becomes available.
Further, Alberta Health is now funding Alberta Association of Nurses to implement the Nurse
Navigator program to support IENs with licensure and employment in Alberta. As of March 31,
2024, the program has supported a total of 139 IENs.

In 2023-24, over $26 million was spent to support capital initiatives under the Rural Health
Facilities Revitalization Program. The program:
     provides capital funding for revitalizing rural health facilities throughout the province;
     focuses on smaller, strategic rural health capital initiatives to underserved rural areas; and,
     supports progress in improving access to emergency departments, urgent care centres and
         emergency medical services (EMS), and treatment services for targeted conditions.

Budget 2023 allocated $64 million over three years to continue the La Crete Maternity and
Community Health Centre capital project to provide increased access to maternity health services.
Design is well underway to provide an integrated health facility for existing services in the
community as well as low-risk, midwife-led birthing services, 24/7 ambulatory care services and



Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                     45
Results Analysis



expanded EMS capacity. Alberta Health worked with the project team and the community to refine
the project scope to meet anticipated needs in the community and enable progress on the design.

With support from Alberta’s government, the Town of Beaverlodge partnered with Landrex Inc. to
build the Mountview Health Complex to replace the current Beaverlodge hospital. In November
2023, AHS signed a lease agreement to lease space in the Mountview Health Complex. The
construction of the new facility will begin in 2024 and will meet current health facility standards
and better support local delivery of more innovative and effective health services.

Alberta Health made progress on increasing capacity and access to surgeries in rural communities
through the ongoing implementation of the Alberta Surgical Initiative (ASI). In 2023-24, the
department continued to implement capital infrastructure investments to support opening,
upgrading, and renovating operating rooms in rural Alberta. For instance, the expansion of Rocky
Mountain House Health Centre, which includes a new operating room, six additional recovery beds,
a patient support area and an updated MDR department, is now complete.

Alberta is creating more rural medical training opportunities and exploring how post-secondary
institutions can help deliver medical education with regional training. The ministry is working with
post-secondary institutions to develop ways to educate and graduate more nurses, especially in
rural areas of the province where there is a shortage. AHS and the University of Calgary launched a
registered nurse education program that allows students to live, learn and work in their home
communities. As of March 31, 2024, there were students in St. Paul in their second year with
expected completion in December 2025; students in Cold lake in the third year of the program with
an expected completion date of December 2024; students at Siksika First Nation in year 1 and year
2 of the program with expected completion dates of April 2026-27; and, students in Wainwright in
year 1, 2 and 3 of the programs with expected completion dates of April 2025-27.

In 2023-24, the government provided over $4 million in funding for the RhPAP to support rural
health education, rural health workforce recognition and the attraction and retention of rural
health professionals. The program supported physician locums to maintain services when rural
physicians need time away from their practice; offered continuing medical education; provided
accommodations for 891 medical learners and 70 allied health learners for rural placements so that
they can train and choose to practice in rural communities; and, supported 50 attraction and
retention committees so that rural communities can attract and retain health professionals.
Further, the Rural Education Supplement and Integrated Doctor Experience (RESIDE) program
administered through the RhPAP signed eight return of service contracts for a total commitment of
$680,000 over three years. This will increase access to physician services in seven rural
communities (High Level, Fox Creek, Bonnyville, Blairmore, Taber, Cardston and Hinton) for up to
three years.

Through Budget 2023, the Government of Alberta provided $15 million to implement the Bursary
for Internationally Educated Nurses (IENs) under the RhPAP. The bursary provides funding to IENs
in Alberta as they complete the bridging training required to practice as a licensed practical nurse
or registered nurse. In exchange for the funding, applicants commit to a return-in-service period
spent working in rural Alberta following completion of their bridging program. Each learner under
this program is offered a bursary of up to $30,000, which includes a fixed incentive to cover
associated fees, along with funding to support living expenses, and a portion of tuition based on the
training program’s length.

The Rural Capacity Investment Fund (RCIF) was implemented in 2023-24 as part of the collective
agreement between AHS, Covenant Health and its unions including the United Nurses of Alberta,
Health Sciences Association of Alberta, and the Alberta Union of Provincial Employees. In 2023-24,
the RCIF invested over $17 million to assist nearly 900 employees who chose to relocate to rural


46                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                         Results Analysis



Alberta and pay out retention payments to over 17,390 rural health professionals. The benefit to
rural Albertans will be realized through improved staff retention rates and fewer vacancies.
Between April 1, 2022, and March 31, 2024, the RCIF has invested about $35 million to support
retention, and recruitment and grow capacity at sites within the South, Central and North Zones.
The RCIF supports recruitment and retention strategies in rural and remote areas of the province,
including relocation assistance.



3.3       Improve access for underserved populations and for First Nations, Métis, and Inuit
          peoples to quality health services that support improved health outcomes.

Alberta’s government continues to prioritize the healthcare needs of First Nations, Métis, and Inuit
Peoples residing in Alberta. Alberta Health works with health and community partners including
First Nations and Métis leaders and the Government of Canada to ensure that health services are
accessible and culturally appropriate. This commitment entails working with Indigenous leaders,
the Government of Canada, and other stakeholders in a way that respects the unique and complex
needs of First Nations, Métis and Inuit Peoples living in Alberta, with several initiatives underway
to improve health outcomes.

Under the Indigenous Modernizing Alberta’s Primary Health Care System (MAPS) initiative, a
separate Indigenous Stream and panel was established to reflect unique challenges and identify
ways to improve the primary health care delivery system for First Nations, Métis and Inuit Peoples
in the province. As part of the Indigenous MAPS final report announced on October 18, 2023, the
Indigenous Primary Health Care Advisory Panel provided 22 recommendations that focused on the
five themes to help improve primary health care services for Indigenous peoples in Alberta:

          Culturally Safe and Appropriate Care: First Nations, Métis and Inuit Peoples have access to
           high quality, culturally safe care that is free of racism, and designed and delivered in a
           manner that respects their unique health care needs.
          Access: First Nations, Métis and Inuit Peoples in Alberta have access to timely, appropriate
           primary health care services from a regular provider or team. Care options are flexible and
           reflect individual and population health needs.
          Integration: First Nations, Métis and Inuit Peoples in Alberta have a health home that
           provides primary health care services and seamless transitions to other health, social and
           community services. Coordination and communication between First Nations and Métis
           communities, health service providers, and organizations are promoted and facilitated by
           service planning and the provincial governance structure.
          Quality: First Nations, Métis and Inuit Peoples receive high quality services from an
           accountable, innovative and sustainable primary health care system. Health service delivery
           is evidence informed, follows best practices, and uses resources efficiently.
          Indigenous Peoples as Partners: First Nations, Métis and Inuit Peoples and their social
           support networks are meaningful partners in achieving their health and wellness goals.
           Health services are proactive, recognize and address underlying influences on health
           outcomes, and respect individual needs and preferences.

These five strategic outcomes guided the work of the panel and continue to support in the ongoing
effort to implementation. To assist with the implementation of the panel’s recommendations, an
Indigenous Primary Health Care Implementation Advisory Panel was created in December 2023
with representation from First Nation, Métis and Inuit health care practitioners, administrators,
and technicians, as well as federal and provincial representatives.


Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                      47
Results Analysis



Alberta Health issued a call for proposals for the Indigenous Patient Navigator grant program on
December 20, 2023, to provide Indigenous communities, groups, and organizations with funding to
improve Indigenous patient access and experience through the provision of cultural and
community-specific assistance and support, as well as facilitating individualized planning for
Indigenous patients to assist with access to and navigation throughout their health care journey.
The application deadline was February 2, 2024, and successful applicants will be announced later in
2024.

Budget 2023 also provided approximately $1 million over three years (2023-24 to 2025-26) to each
of the two Indigenous post-secondary institutions, Blue Quills University and Red Crow Community
College, to support the delivery of the Health Care Aide (HCA) program in an Indigenous learning
environment to approximately 16 students per institution in each year. This funding supports
delivery of a culturally infused HCA program that will aid students in better understanding the
delivery of culturally appropriate care while addressing the needs of their communities. These
programs help to address the health care provider labour and skill shortages experienced on and
off reserves by First Nations, Métis and Inuit Peoples and their communities.

In 2023-24, Alberta Health provided $10.8 million, which was equivalent to over 35 FTEs of
physician funding, to the Indigenous Wellness Program (IWP) clinical Alternative Relationship Plan
(ARP). The IWP clinical ARP provided program services for 16 communities (an increase from
11 communities for 2022-23) in 25 facilities, in addition to virtual services through the Alberta
Indigenous Virtual Care Clinic. This program continues to improve access to physician services for
Indigenous people in communities throughout Alberta, including those living on reserve and in
Metis Settlements, with the additional benefit overcoming geographical, economic, political,
cultural, and socio-historical barriers faced by First Nation, Métis and Inuit Peoples when accessing
health care services. The ministry will continue to engage stakeholders on program scope and
expansion.

Alberta remains committed to implementing Jordan’s Principle commitments. Alberta Health
continues to work with the First Nations Health Consortium and ministry partners to ensure that
First Nations children in Alberta experience no denials, delays, or disruptions in publicly funded
health, education, or social services due to jurisdictional disputes because of their First Nations
status. For example, the Jordan’s Principle Cross-Ministry Technical Working Group is working in
collaborating with First Nations partners to ensure Jordan’s Principle is meeting the needs of First
Nations children.

Alberta Health also continues to work with Indigenous Services Canada’s First Nations and Inuit
Health Branch (FNIHB). In 2023-24, a representative from FNIHB was appointed as a member of
the MAPS Indigenous Advisory Panel, as well as a member of the MAPS Indigenous Implementation
Advisory Panel, tasked with providing advice on how jurisdictional barriers could be addressed
through the implementation of the recommendations outlined in the Indigenous Primary Health
Care Advisory Panel’s final report.

3.4   Prevent injuries and manage chronic diseases and conditions through policy
      development, health and wellness promotion, screening, strengthening primary health
      care delivery, and initiatives that facilitate individual and community wellbeing in
      healthy environments

The government is actively supporting a range of policies and public health initiatives aimed at
enhancing the well-being of Albertans. These efforts focused on promoting health, preventing


48                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                         Results Analysis



injuries, and combatting diseases. The government provides a leadership role in safeguarding the
health and safety of Albertans, setting forth public policies across various domains. This included
maternal, infant, and early child development, as well as initiatives targeting injury prevention,
cannabis usage, tobacco and vaping control, and the advancement of population wellness and
health equity.

In September 2023, the ministry launched a call for proposals for the third Health Innovation
Implementation and Spread Fund. As of March 2024, three projects were approved for funding,
which included over $467,000 for extending the endovascular therapy treatment window for
stroke from six hours to 24 hours from the time of onset; almost $1.5 million for streamlining
gastrointestinal cancer diagnoses by expanding a proven model for use by all Albertans; and, more
than $340,000 for sustaining and spreading the Contrast Reducing Injuries Sustained by Kidneys
Initiative across Alberta’s cardiac catheterization centres.

Government continues to support cancer screening programs to return screening rates to pre-
pandemic levels. Alberta Health continued the annual competitive Cancer Research for Screening
and Prevention (CRSP) funding program, which launched in September 2022 to build capacity and
excellence in cancer research, collaboration and innovation. The program provides three-year
grants of up to $1 million each to fund research, education and initiatives that promote cancer
prevention, early detection, and screening, and improve the journey of care for cancer patients and
their families. In 2023-24, over $3.5 million was committed to successful recipients, which enabled
the five inaugural CRSP projects, including four Indigenous-led initiatives, to continue work started
in 2022. The five new projects span various areas to address gaps in screening and prevention,
including: supporting nurse navigators to lead cancer screening and prevention clinics, and
facilitate follow-up with patients including those in rural settings; assessing artificial intelligence
tools to improve capacity for lung cancer screening; enhancing lung cancer risk reduction for non-
tobacco lung cancers; establishing screening and prevention guidelines for individuals with a
genetic predisposition to cancer; and, supporting Métis Peoples in Alberta who must travel long
distances to access cancer screening.

As part of the government’s three-phase plan to improve diabetes care, insulin pump benefits will
be transferred from the Insulin Pump Therapy Program to government-sponsored health benefit
plans. This transition will provide access to newer, more advanced models of insulin pumps. In
2022, Alberta Health set up the Diabetes Working Group (DWG) to review Alberta’s diabetes care
pathway and develop a comprehensive diabetes strategy, identify and address gaps in care, and
improve diabetes prevention, diagnosis, treatment and management. On March 31, 2024, the DWG
provided its final report and recommendations to the minister.

Alberta Health has made several targeted investments to support a variety of initiatives and
programs related to women’s health. In the first six months of 2023-24, programs supporting
vulnerable women, including the H.E.R. (Healthy, Empowered, Resilient) Pregnancy Program in
Edmonton and the Prenatal Outreach Support Team in Calgary provided intensive wrap-around
supports to a total of 205 vulnerable women who were pregnant or of child-bearing age, and an
additional 158 women of childbearing age were provided one-time or short-term assistance.
Approximately 60 per cent of women accessing these programs identify as Indigenous, with over
half of the women currently or having recently experienced domestic violence and facing barriers
to accessing health services. Of women enrolled in the programs, 73 per cent indicated
improvements in accessing healthcare, 50 per cent improved their mental health and wellbeing and
49 per cent had improved safety for themselves and their infants. About 74 per cent of infants born
to women in the program were born at a healthy birthweight. Alberta Health also provided funding
to support the University of Alberta’s Cultural Safety for Indigenous Mothers Program, which
supports pregnant Indigenous women in Maskwacis with increased access to high quality,
culturally safe and competent pre- and post-natal care to improve maternal-infant health outcomes.


Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                      49
Results Analysis



Alberta’s previous tobacco reduction strategies have proven successful in reducing overall smoking
rates. The government is committed to preventing and reducing the health harms of smoking,
secondhand smoke, and vaping. A new, five-year, Tobacco and Vaping Strategy was released on
January 22, 2024. It builds upon the successes of Alberta’s previous tobacco reduction strategies,
dating back to 2002. The strategy will seek to drive further reductions in tobacco use, and for the
first time, vaping product use, particularly among youth. The objectives of the strategy are to:
acknowledge the negative health and financial impacts of commercial tobacco and vaping on
Albertans and affirm a commitment to reducing their use; identify strategic directions as a
framework for collective and collaborative action with stakeholders and key partners; and,
facilitate the development of a collective body of key partners with a mandate to assess provincial
tobacco and vaping reduction, prevention and cessation efforts and provide recommendations for
future action.

The ministry also continues to support Communities Choose Well (CCW), a free provincial program
that fosters the wellbeing of Albertans by engaging and supporting communities to transform local
practices, places, policies and partnerships so that healthy eating and active living are easy choices
for everyone. From April 1, 2023, to September 30, 2023, over $350,000 was spent on building
healthier environments. The program supported healthy eating and active living champions
through learning opportunities, funding and recognition programs to build healthier environments
within their communities. The CCW program engaged 1,032 unique champions, 313 of whom
worked directly with Indigenous populations. The champions represent 257 unique municipalities
and 83 Indigenous communities and organizations across Alberta. Eight community organizations
were funded through the Healthy Community Seed Grants. The majority of the 2023-24 seed grant
recipients focused on healthy eating and active living initiatives for children and youth.

Alberta continues to demonstrate an ongoing commitment to tackling the global threat of
antimicrobial resistance (AMR). The department continued to work with Alberta Agriculture and
Irrigation and Alberta Environment and Protected Areas on a One Health AMR Framework for
Action to help guide collective efforts to address the growing threat of AMR in Alberta. In 2023-24,
Alberta’s One Health AMR Framework for Action was finalized and approved for public release by
the Ministries of Health, Agriculture and Irrigation and Environment and Protected Areas. The AMR
Framework identifies 15 Alberta-specific areas for action within the three pillars of Stewardship,
Surveillance, and Infection Prevention and Control. Antimicrobial stewardship activities were
identified, and implementation plans were developed to immediately target both the human and
animal health sectors. Further, funding for AMR was approved to support targeted activities in
antimicrobial stewardship and surveillance. Alberta also endorsed the Pan-Canadian Action Plan on
AMR.

3.5   Modernize and transform the continuing care system to improve access and shift to
      more care in the community.

The new Continuing Care Act came into effect on April 1, 2024. The Act establishes consistent
authority and oversight for Alberta Health regarding licensing and compliance monitoring of
continuing care accommodations and the delivery of continuing care services in Alberta to ensure
consistency and accountability. The new legislation established one overarching legislative
framework for the full spectrum of continuing care services and settings in Alberta (i.e., home and
community care, supportive living and continuing care homes). It sets the conditions for change in
the continuing care sector and supports more Albertans to age at home, enables flexibility in the
workforce, and improves oversight and quality of services. Ultimately, the new legislative
framework will support a high-quality, accountable, and flexible continuing care system.

The Government of Alberta continues to invest in continuing care transformation to provide a
sustainable way to meet both the increasing demands for continuing care and the needs and desires


50                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                        Results Analysis



of Albertans. Budget 2023 invested $1 billion over three years (2023-24 to 2025-26) to begin
transformation in the continuing care system to meet the growing needs of an aging population,
including supporting initiatives that will enable a shift to more care in the community, enhance
workforce capacity, increase choice and innovation, and improve the quality of care within the
continuing care sector.

Continuing care transformation will enable better care for seniors and those requiring continuing
care services by implementing recommendations from the Facility-Based Continuing Care Review
(FBCC), the Palliative and End-of-Life Care Report, and the Office of the Auditor General Reports. As
of March 31, 2024, of the 42 recommendations resulting from the FBCC, three have been addressed,
two are partially addressed, 29 are in progress and eight are planned for a future response.

Alberta Health signed the Canada-Alberta Aging with Dignity Funding Agreement with the
Government of Canada that provides Alberta with $139.4 million per year over four years,
beginning in 2023-24, plus $69.4 million in 2027-28, to help Albertans age with dignity close to
home, with improved access to home care, and with quality care in continuing care homes.

The performance measure 3.a monitors the number of patients waiting in hospital approved and
ready for placement to Designated Supportive Living or Long-Term Care in the 14 largest acute care
sites (excluding the Alberta Children’s Hospital and the Stollery Children's Hospital). As of March
31, 2024, 205 patients were waiting in the 14 largest hospitals for continuing care placement
compared to 240 on March 31, 2023, which represented almost a 15 per cent improvement. During
2023-24, AHS experienced significant hospital capacity pressures across the province due to higher
demand for services from a growing and aging population as well as surges in demand due to
respiratory illness. In response to a higher demand for services, AHS introduced a number of
strategies to reduce the number of people waiting in hospital for placement (i.e., Alternative Level
of Care reduction strategies) that were aimed at relieving hospital capacity pressures. These
included adding net new and temporary community and continuing care capacity, facilitating
additional discharges from hospital with admissions to continuing care homes on weekends, and
enabling earlier discharges from hospital with additional home care supports until a designated
living option became available.

Performance Measure 3.a
Number of patients waiting in hospital for continuing care placement

                                                                              2023-24        2023-24
                                        2020-21     2021-22     2022-23
                                                                               Target         Actual
  Number of patients waiting in
                                                                               Below
  hospital for continuing care             190         216         240                          205
                                                                              2022-23
  placement



Between December 2023 and March 2024, 235 new continuing care spaces were added with a
temporary call out to operators. The number of patients specifically waiting for transfer to a
continuing or community care facility after finishing their required hospital care has been reduced
by almost 30 per cent. In addition, from November 2023 to March 2024, an additional
150 temporary continuing care spaces were created to help free up hospital beds to reduce
emergency department and surgical wait times. Further, in 2023-24, the government provided
$24.7 million to continuing care operators to partially offset inflationary increases to
accommodation charges for continuing care residents. This support made accommodation charges


Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                      51
Results Analysis



more affordable for residents and shielded them from the full cost of living pressures associated
with higher-than-average inflation.

A key focus in 2023-24 was to enable a shift from facility to home-based care, where safe and
appropriate. The ministry strives to provide Albertans with care where they want it most: in their
homes and communities. By providing home care services that are responsive to changing needs,
Albertans are supported to safely manage their own care while reducing reliance on acute and
emergency services.

The performance indicator on the number of home care hours provided (millions hours) and
number of individual/unique clients monitors shifting reliance from facility to home-based care,
where safe and appropriate to do so. There was overall improvement in the total number of home
care clients served and hours provided in 2023-24. AHS served over 130,111 unique home care
clients, representing over a 2.8 per cent increase compared to 126,539 in 2022-23. In addition, AHS
provided more than 12.71 million home care hours in 2023-24, which was over 40,000 hours more
than 2022-23 (12.67 million). In addition, there was an increase in Alberta’s home care service
capacity to support Albertans to safely manage their own care and reduce reliance on acute and
emergency services. The average hours of direct care provided to residents of continuing care
homes increased in 2023-24 to improve resident care experience and health outcomes. The number
of hours per resident per day increased from 2.8 to almost 3.0 hours and about 3.4 to 3.6 hours for
Designated Supported Living Level 4 and long-term care, respectively.

In addition, the percentage of medical patients with an unplanned hospital readmission within
30 days of discharge from hospital was 12.7 per cent in 2023-24. This is 0.2 percentage points
lower than last year (2022-23). A lower percentage means fewer patients have been readmitted to
hospital within one month of discharge. A high rate of readmissions increases costs and may mean
the health system is not performing as well as it could be. Although readmission may involve many
factors, lower readmission rates may show that Albertans are supported by discharge planning and
continuity of care. Continuity of care refers to the provision of coordinated, seamless, and person-
centered health care services to improve the health outcomes and experiences of Albertans. Rates
may also be impacted by the nature of the population served by a hospital facility, such as elderly
patients or patients with complex health needs, or by the accessibility of post-discharge health care
services or social supports in the community.


Performance Indicator 3.b
Number of home care hours provided (millions hours) and number of individual/unique
clients


                                    2019-20         2020-21          2021-22           2022-23          2023-24

  Number of home care
                                      12.52           11.46            11.95             12.67              12.71
  hours provided
  Number of unique
                                    124,779          117,502         122,084           126,539          130,111
  home care clients1
1Results from 2019-20 to 2022-23 have been revised to reflect additional data received after publication.




52                                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                        Results Analysis



Alberta continues to invest in community-based services and supports as part of the transformation
of Alberta’s continuing care system to ensure Albertans are getting the care they need, when and
where they need it. Alberta Health worked with Alberta Blue Cross and AHS to successfully expand
the Client-Directed Home Care Invoicing model to rural areas of the province. This program
provides Albertans with increased choice and flexibility in selecting their home care service
provider and increases their ability to influence and direct how their care is provided. The program
grew from 644 clients on April 1, 2023, to 1,637 in March 2024.

Government invested over $10 million to expand home and community-based palliative and end-of-
life services and supports through grant funded projects. Examples of these projects include:

        $1.4 million to support caregivers (people caring for family members or friends) to
         strengthen caregiver-centred care and build community and connections between
         caregivers across Alberta;
        $2.4 million investment in community projects to support seniors who are at risk of
         hospitalization or moving to a continuing care home, to age well at home through the
         provision of community-based, non-medical supports such as transportation, food security,
         housekeeping and snow removal; and
        $2.5 million innovation grant to Pilgrims Hospice Society’s Roozen Family Hospice Centre in
         Edmonton to implement and study the unique wrap-around hospice model used at the
         Pilgrims Hospice Society, to inform hospice funding model work to be undertaken in 2024-
         25.

Additionally, government initiated four innovative home and community care pilot projects that are
enabling transitions home from acute care (Calgary and Central Zones), supporting clients and
caregivers with extended or overnight hours at adult day programs (Calgary and Central Zones);
and, supporting vulnerable, hard to house individuals with medication management (Edmonton
Zone). Overall, these actions will help seniors and adults with disabilities stay in their homes and
communities longer with additional supports and appropriate home and community care.

The Government of Alberta is strengthening workforce capacity and attracting and retaining the
continuing care workforce through transformation initiatives. In 2023-24, Alberta maintained the
$2 per hour increase to health care aide (HCAs) wages that was introduced for contracted operators
during the pandemic. In addition, the government increased funded rates for home care agencies to
increase HCA and licensed practical nurse wages in home care to help reduce the gap in pay
between continuing care home settings and home and community care. In 2023-24, the
government also invested in innovative opportunities to attract and train more HCAs, including:

        $666,000 spent to support Indigenous post-secondary institutions to provide HCA
         programming that will train more HCAs to be able to deliver culturally appropriate care;
         and
        $1.5 million to support the College of Licensed Practical Nurses of Alberta to review the HCA
         curriculum to ensure that the program continues to meet the needs of students and
         supports them to be able to work within the continuing care system, and to begin
         preparations for HCA regulation.

Supporting staff mental health and wellness is a key priority for continuing care transformation.
That is why, in 2023-24, government provided $2.5 million to the Alberta Continuing Care
Association to support eligible operators to initiate innovative, staff-informed projects to increase
staff mental health and wellness in continuing care homes and home and community care.
Additionally, government provided $150,000 to the Continuing Care Safety Association of Alberta in
2023-24 to reduce stigma related to mental health in the workplace. Further, government invested


Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                     53
Results Analysis



almost $900,000 in Translating Research in Elder Care in 2023-24 to develop evidence-based
workforce strategies and tools to improve workplace conditions and quality of work life for staff
and management.

Budget 2023 invested almost $90.6 million over three years to complete work required at the Gene
Zwozdesky Centre at Norwood. The Norwood West building at the Gene Zwozdesky Centre opened
its doors on October 31, 2023, and increased continuing care capacity by 29 beds for a total of 234
beds. In addition to the increased capacity, the 38,000 square metre centre features a fully
accessible green roof, dental clinic, and new ambulatory clinics that provide greater access to
complex, post-acute and continuing care. Work will begin on the Angus McGugan Pavilion in 2024-
25, which is expected to increase the total number of beds to 350.

In 2023-24, additional investments were made in the Continuing Care Capital Program (CCCP),
which supports four program streams that will modernize continuing care homes; develop
innovative small care homes; provide culturally appropriate care for Indigenous peoples; and, add
new spaces in priority communities having the greatest need. Ten not-for-profit and for-profit
applicants were conditionally approved to modernize outdated publicly funded continuing care
homes under the inaugural CCCP - Modernization stream. Modernization includes replacement,
renovation and/or upgrades to current standards to improve the quality, life safety and
accessibility of existing continuing care homes. The inaugural 2023-24 CCCP Small Care Home
stream launched on April 25, 2023, and closed on November 30, 2023. Evaluation and approval of
the applications is expected to conclude in early summer 2024. In addition, the second request for
grant process for the CCCP Indigenous stream and a request for grant process for the CCCP Priority
Communities stream are being prepared for launch in 2024-25. The Continuing Care Design
Standards and Best Practices were published in March 2024 that outline the requirements and best
practices for designing continuing care homes. The Design Standards were updated based on
emerging research, COVID-19 learnings, and recommendations from Facility Based Continuing Care
review and Auditor General Report.




54                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                              Results Analysis




Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology
Performance Measure 1.a:
     Emergency department wait times: 90th percentile time to initial physician assessment
     in the 16 largest sites (hours)

Methodology
The ED wait times are calculated based on the total time from the first documented time after arrival at an
ED to the time the patient leaves the ED for an inpatient hospital bed.
   Inclusions: Top 16 largest sites and emergency department visits
   Exclusions:
            o Both registration and triage date/time are unknown, missing or invalid
            o Visits where physician initial assessment time is missing or invalid
            o Any visit that is not face to face visits
            o Any visit where the most responsible provider services is not a physician
            o Visits where patient left without triage
            o Visits where patient left without being seen by a service provider
            o Visits where patient was dead on arrival (DOA)
Step 1. For each record with valid start and end times, calculate wait time in minutes as: (physician initial
assessment time)−minimum (registration time, triage time)
Step 2. Calculate summary measure as 90th percentile (in hours).

Source

Emergency Department Visit Data Repository Alberta Health Services



Performance Measure 1.b:
     EMS 90th percentile response times (minutes) for the most urgent (life threatening)
     calls

Methodology
Response time is calculated based on events thought to be life threatening at the time of the 911 call and
includes Delta and Echo events. These events are a subset of the total number of Emergency Events
   Inclusion: Event level response interval for all 911 generated events with a Delta or Echo
    determinant categorized by geographical type (Metro/Urban, Communities > 3,000, Rural or
    Remote).
   Exclusions:
            o Event level response interval for all 911 generated events with an Alpha, Bravo or
                Charlie determinant.
            o Inter-Facility Transfers.
            o EMS responses with missing timestamps (such as arrive on scene) related to interval
                calculation are excluded
The 90th percentile response interval is calculated for all 911 generated Delta and Echo
determinant events within a specified geographical type
Source




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                           55
Results Analysis



The data for this measure is extracted from the EMS Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD) data



Performance Indicator 1.c:
     Percentage of surgical procedures that met national wait time benchmarks

 Methodology
Ready-to-treat (RTT) wait time (in days) is calculated for each relevant record meeting specified
inclusion/exclusion criteria.
    Inclusion Criteria: All elective hip, knee replacement and cataract surgeries based on surgery
     procedure catalogue descriptions. All urgency levels.
    Exclusion Criteria: persons who received emergency surgical care. Cases with an invalid RTT
     date. When cataract surgery is required for both of a patient’s eyes, only the wait time for
     surgery on the first eye is included in the wait time calculations.
 RTT Date = The date that the surgeon determines the patient is ready for the surgical intervention. The
       RTT Date excludes patient delays or voluntary waits.
 Treatment Date = The date the treatment (surgical procedure) took place.
 RTT Wait time = Treatment (surgical procedure) Date minus RTT Date
 National RTT wait time benchmarks:
     o Hip replacement national benchmark is 182 days
     o Knee replacement national benchmark is 182 days
     o Cataract surgery national benchmark (for first eye) is 112 days.
                   # of cases completed with a RTT wait time less than or equal to the national
 Percentage =                              RTT wait time benchmark                                     X 100

                                    # of completed cases with valid RTT dates
 Source
Local Operating Room (OR) Information Systems, AHS and OR Data Repository, Alberta health Services.




Performance Indicator 1.d:
     Number of registered physicians in Alberta

 Methodology
Counts are as of December 31 of each year as reported by the College of Physicians and Surgeons of
Alberta (CPSA). CPSA’s year end is December 31 of each year and reports the number of physicians as of
this date. Note that physician registration counts are cyclical throughout the year Counts decrease in the
first quarter as physicians that do not renew their registration are removed and increase throughout the
year, particularly in the third quarter when the majority of new physicians register after completing residency
programs.
Source
College of Physicians and Surgeons of Alberta https://cpsa.ca/wp-content/uploads/2024/02/Registration-
Statistics-2023-2019.pdf




56                                                                              Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                               Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 2.a:
     Alberta health care spending per capita vs comparator provinces (2022-23)

    Methodology
    Health expenditure data is extracted from Government Finance Statistics (Canadian Classification of
    Functions of Government (CCOFOG) by consolidated provincial/territorial and local government component
    on Health) available from Statistics Canada. The most recently released data (November 28, 2023) provides
    revised actuals for 2021-22 and preliminary estimates for 2022-23. 2020-21 was the first year of CCOFOG
    data to include COVID-19 expenditure estimates in the health component.

    Population estimates (release date: December 19, 2023). The population estimates for Q4 2022 are used in
    the calculation.

    The data is presented for consolidated governments. Provincial-territorial and local governments’ data can be
    compared across provinces and territories because consolidation considers differences in administrative
    structure and government service delivery by removing the effects of internal public sector transactions within
    each jurisdiction.

    The Canadian Classification of Functions of Government (CCOFOG) is a detailed classification of the
    functions, or socioeconomic objectives, that general government units aim to achieve through various kinds of
    outlays. Therefore, by definition, Government Business Enterprises (GBE's) are excluded from this data.
    Per capita provincial                         provincial government health expenditure
    government health       =
    expenditure                                       population estimates
    Source
 Government Finance Statistics (Canadian Classification of Functions of Government (CCOFOG) by
 consolidated provincial/territorial and local government component) data on health, Statistics Canada. .
 https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=1010000501

 Population estimates, quarterly, Statistics Canada.
 https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=1710000901



Performance Measure 3.a:
     Number of patients waiting in hospital for continuing care placement

Methodology
Count of the number of individual persons assessed and approved for a publicly funded continuing care home
who are waiting in hospital acute care or sub-acute care beds in the 14 largest acute care sites at the end of a
specified month, quarter, or fiscal year.

     Inclusions: People who have been assessed and approved for admissions to a CCH, and who are
      waiting in: acute care spaces, sub-acute spaces (including palliative end-of-life care spaces,
      restorative care, and transition unit) that are legislated under the Hospitals Act.

      14 Largest Hospitals:
       o Chinook Regional Hospital
       o Foothills Medical Centre
       o Glenrose Rehabilitation Hospital
       o Grande Prairie Regional Hospital



Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                            57
Results Analysis



     o    Grey Nuns Community Hospital
     o    Medicine Hat Regional Hospital
     o    Misericordia Community Hospital
     o    Northern Lights Regional Health Care Centre
     o    Peter Lougheed Centre
     o    Red Deer Regional Hospital
     o    Rockyview General Hospital
     o    Royal Alexandra Hospital
     o    South Health Campus
     o    University of Alberta Hospital

    Exclusions:
     o    People who are waitlisted but who are categorized as a Process Delay for the following reasons:
          medically unstable or care type under review.

This measure is calculated as the arithmetic sum, at a specific point in time, of the total number of individual
persons assessed and approved for admission to a publicly funded continuing care home who are waiting in an
acute care, or a sub-acute care hospital bed in the 14 largest acute care sites, for any of the following types of
continuing care:
     o CCH type A
     o CCH type B

The specific point in time when the number of people waiting for a CCH space is to be calculated is the last day
of the month of each quarter in a fiscal year; that is, the last day of June, September, December, and March in
a given fiscal year. The last day of March (March 31) in a given fiscal year is the date to be used in calculation
of the result to be reported in the annual reports of the Government of Alberta, Alberta Health, and Alberta
Health Services.

Source
Alberta Health Services




58                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                             Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 3.b:
     Number of home care hours provided (millions hours) and number of
     individual/unique clients

Methodology
Home Care Hours
Hours provided by both AHS staff and agency contracts that are reported under the Home Care Financial
Directive. AHS hours are a calculated metric based on eManager statistical hours. Agency hours are based on
authorised and billed hours paid.

   Inclusion and exclusion:
    AHS:
       o AHS hours includes worked hours including relief and overtime
       o Include hours related to management, administration, and clinical supports
       o Excludes non-worked hours
    Agency:
       o Agency contracted hours are based on the amounts paid to contracted operators. Hours paid are
            based on authorised billed hours and reconciled by zones.
       o Includes: added care and congregate living environments; authorised and billed travel hours for
            congregate living environments and supplemental rural travel; and non-delivered paid hours. These
            are hours that can be billed due to: short notice cancellation, client not home or safety issue at the
            residence.
       o Excludes client directed care, self-managed care, and day programs and cancelled or missed
            visits/missed hours. These are not billable.

Number of individual/unique clients
The total number of unique individuals with an active registration in the Home Care Program (HCP).
   Inclusions: Individuals of all age groups are eligible for and receive Home Care Services.Home Care
    clients with an active registration at least one day during the reporting period.
   Exclusions: Clients who are discharged prior to the specified reporting period. Clients who are
    discharged prior to the specified reporting period. Clients who are served only by Hospital Transition
    Services in Calgary and Edmonton. Clients who are served only by Community Aids to Independent
    Living. Clients who have not yet been discharged but are considered “inactive” or “stale”.
    a)
Arithmetic sum of the number of unique home care clients considering inclusion and exclusion criteria

Source
AHS/Agency Hours:
   HomeFirst application for authorisation of care and billing system, Meditech, Connect Care and
    Oracle/eManager

Number of individual/unique clients
   Meditech: South Zone, Central Zone, Edmonton Zone, North Zone
   PARIS: Calgary Zone




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                          59
Results Analysis



Additional Performance Metrics not included in Health Business Plan 2023-26

Performance Indicator (Outcome 1, Key Objective 1.1):
     Annual number of surgeries provided

 Methodology
 Data is provided by Alberta Health Services and obtained from local Operating Room (OR) Information
 Systems (and other sources) and combined in an OR data repository, from which Main OR cases are
 identified.

 The total surgeries includes the number of surgeries performed in main OR and CSF sites only. It
 excludes procedures performed in the minor procedure rooms, endoscopy suites, emergency
 departments, labour & delivery, etc.

 Some data validation is ongoing and as such, future reported numbers might vary. Current estimate is
 results adjustment will be less than 1% overall.
 Source
 Local Operating Room (OR) Information Systems, Alberta Health Services (AHS), and OR Data
 Repository, AHS.




Performance Indicator (Outcome 1, Key Objective 1.1):
     Percentage scheduled surgeries performed in chartered surgical facilities (CSFs)

 Methodology
 Main operating room activity is used as representative of “surgeries” in the province. Based on identified
 main operating cases, those which are non-emergency are identified and the percentage where the site of
 delivery was a CSF is reported.
      o Numerator: Non-Emergency Main Operating Room cases completed in CSFs
      o Denominator: Non-Emergency Main Operating Room cases.

                     # surgeries performed in chartered surgical facilities under contract
                                                     with AHS
 Percentage =                                                                                        X 100
                      total # surgeries in chartered surgical facilities and hospitals from
                                                   April 1 to Mar 31
 Source
 Alberta Health Services Main Operating Room (OR) information system sources as extracted to OR data
 repository as of March 31, 2022. Sites that do not have OR information systems were not included.




60                                                                              Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                              Results Analysis



Performance Indicator (Outcome 3, Key Objective 3.1):
     Children by age two immunized for diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis (whooping cough),
     polio, Haemophilus influenza type b) (DTaP-IPV-Hib) and for measles, mumps, rubella
     (MMR)

 Methodology
 Using data from the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan population registries, children in Alberta are
 followed through time (i.e., from date of birth to study end date). Exclusions include individuals leaving
 Alberta, individuals who died, individuals who do not belong to the study period, First Nations individuals,
 and residents of Lloydminster.

 Coverage rates are based on a birth cohort and reported at age two. Once established, the population-
 based birth cohort is linked to Imm/ARI using the Unique Lifetime Identifier to get immunization
 information.
 Calculation: Childhood immunization coverage is calculated using a survival analysis (time-to-
 immunization) method based on the specified population-based birth cohort. The analysis measures the
 probability that the child will receive required vaccines by age two. The data is calculated for 2022
 calendar year.
 Source
 Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan (AHCIP) Quarterly Population Registries; Immunization/Adverse
 Reactions to Immunization (Imm/ARI), Alberta Vital Statistics, Birth Files.


Performance Indicator (Outcome 3, Key Objective 3.5):
     Unplanned medical readmission from hospital within 30 days of discharge

 Methodology
 Numerator: Total number of medical patients with unplanned readmission to hospital within 30 days of
 discharge.
 Inclusion Criteria: Residents of Alberta covered by the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan. Admission
    day of subsequent readmission is less than or equal to 30 days of initial discharge date from an acute
    care hospital.
 Exclusion Criteria: Transfers (admitted within 6 hours of discharge from another hospital, or 6-12
    hours after transfer from or to an acute care facility); newborn, still birth, cadaver admissions; non-
    acute care admissions; pediatric (less than 20 years of age), surgery, obstetrics, palliative care,
    mental health admissions; hospital admissions for cancer therapy; non-urgent, planned admissions.


Hospital Readmission           Number of hospital inpatient discharges where a patient was
Percentage     =                 readmitted to hospital within 30 days of index discharge           X 100
(unadjusted)                            Number of hospital inpatients discharged
 Risk Adjustment: Accounts for differences in patient characteristics that may vary over years. Based on
 the list of risk factors (e.g., age, sex, case mixing grouping, Charlson comorbidity score) published by the
 Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI), and the Alberta-built, provincial specific logistic
 regression model using data from the past five years to estimate the Alberta average and expected
 readmissions based on patients’ risk profile. The risk-adjusted rate is calculated using the following
 formula:




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                            61
Financial Information




Financial Information

Table of Contents
     Reporting Entity and Method Consolidation...................................................................................... 63
     Ministry Financial Highlights.................................................................................................................... 64
           Consolidated Statement of Revenues and Expenses (unaudited) ..................................... 64
           Revenue and Expense Highlights .................................................................................................... 65
           Expenses – Directly Incurred Detailed by Object (unaudited) ........................................... 69
     Supplemental Financial Information ..................................................................................................... 70
           Tangible Capital Assets (unaudited).............................................................................................. 70
           Portfolio Investments (unaudited)................................................................................................. 71
     Financial Statements of Other Reporting Entities ........................................................................... 72
           Alberta Health Services ....................................................................................................................... 73
           Health Quality Council of Alberta..................................................................................................129
     Other Financial Information ...................................................................................................................151
           Department of Health ........................................................................................................................152
           Ministry of Health ................................................................................................................................159
           Public Interest Disclosure (Whistleblower Protection) Act ...................................................160




62                                                                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                      Financial Information




Reporting Entity and Method Consolidation
The consolidated ministry financial information is prepared in accordance with government’s
stated accounting policies, which are based on Canadian Public Sector Accounting Standards.

The reporting entity is the Ministry of Health for which the Minister of Health is accountable. The
accounts of the Ministry of Health, which includes the Department of Health, Alberta Health
Services (AHS), and Health Quality Council of Alberta (HQCA), are consolidated using the line-by-
line method.

The audited financial statements of AHS and HQCA are included in the annual report. Accounts of
entities that are consolidated by AHS are listed in note 2a (i) and (ii) of AHS consolidated financial
statements.

Under the line-by-line method, accounting policies of the consolidated entities are adjusted to
conform to those of the government and the results of each line item in their financial statements
(revenue, expense, assets, and liabilities) are included in government’s results. Revenue and
expense, capital, investing and financing transactions, and related asset and liability balances
between the consolidated entities have been eliminated.

A list of the individual entities making up the ministry are shown on the “Management’s
Responsibility for Reporting” statement included in this annual report.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                         63
Financial Information




Ministry Financial Highlights
Consolidated Statement of Revenues and Expenses (unaudited)
Year ended March 31, 2024
(in thousands)

                                                                    2024                  2023                 Change from
                                                           Budget           Actual        Actual           Budget     2023 Actual
Revenues
 Internal Government Transfers                         $      468,138 $   493,054 $         433,814    $     24,916 $      59,240
 Transfers from Government of Canada                        6,242,219   6,232,244         5,844,404          (9,975)      387,840
 Premiums, Fees and Licences                                  632,001     667,751           577,448          35,750        90,303
 Investment Income                                             54,020     118,359            39,716          64,339        78,643
 Other Revenue                                                522,475     630,162           657,969         107,687       (27,807)
 Ministry Total                                             7,918,853   8,141,570         7,553,351         222,717       588,219
 Inter-Ministry Consolidation Adjustments                    (493,962)   (527,932)         (470,245)        (33,970)      (57,687)
Adjusted Ministry Total                                     7,424,891   7,613,638         7,083,106         188,747       530,532

Expenses - Directly Incurred
 Ministry Support Services                                     69,599          79,719        65,805          10,120         13,914
 Physician Compensation and Development                     6,178,296       6,420,869     6,019,667         242,573        401,202
 Acute Care                                                 4,661,667       4,970,478     4,273,300         308,811        697,178
 Diagnostic, Therapeutic, and Other Patient Services        2,903,157       2,955,802     2,601,729          52,645        354,073
 Drugs and Supplemental Health Benefits                     2,768,842       2,798,801     2,495,107          29,959        303,694
 Community Care                                             2,021,800       1,933,551     1,684,057         (88,249)       249,494
 Continuing Care                                            1,405,031       1,419,320     1,234,839          14,289        184,481
 Home Care                                                    902,800         843,510       715,119         (59,290)       128,391
 Population and Public Health                                 827,904       1,019,529       649,310         191,625        370,219
 Emergency Medical Services                                   739,569         663,029       591,807         (76,540)        71,222
 Support Services                                           2,531,200       2,780,825     2,473,388         249,625        307,437
 Information Technology                                       907,385         887,716       863,787         (19,669)        23,929
 Administration                                               541,300         574,058       484,506          32,758         89,552
 Research and Education                                       133,492         128,173       117,003          (5,319)        11,170
 Infrastructure Support                                        89,452           1,162        11,311         (88,290)       (10,149)
 Debt Servicing                                                15,000          15,788        16,959             788         (1,171)
 Cancer Research and Prevention Investment                     10,380          10,328         9,184             (52)         1,144
 COVID-19 Pandemic Response                                       -               -       1,210,533             -       (1,210,533)
 Ministry Total                                            26,706,874      27,502,658    25,517,411         795,784      1,985,247
 Inter-Ministry Consolidation Adjustments                    (250,375)       (287,755)     (293,385)        (37,380)         5,630
Adjusted Ministry Total                                    26,456,499      27,214,903    25,224,026         758,404      1,990,877

Adjusted Annual Deficit                            $ (19,031,608) $ (19,601,265) $ (18,140,920)        $   (569,657) $ (1,460,345)




64                                                                                            Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                            Financial Information



Revenue and Expense Highlights
Consolidated Revenues (prior to inter-ministry consolidation adjustments)



                                             Other Revenue
                                                   8%                  Internal Government
                                                                             Transfers
             Investment Income                                                  6%
                    1%

             Premiums, Fees and
                  Licences
                     8%




                                                                             Transfers from
                                                                             Government of
                                                                                Canada
                                                                                 77%


  Total revenue for the year was $8.1 billion, which was $223 million higher than budget mainly
  due to:
  •   Transfers from Government of Canada as result of unbudgeted new funding for Working Together to
      improve health care for Canadians and in-kind receipt of COVID-19 drugs and supplies ($106 million);
  •   Premiums, Fees and Licenses as a result of higher volume of healthcare services billable to other
      Canadian jurisdictions and non-residents of Canada;
  •   Investment Income as a result of increased interest and dividend due to favourable market conditions
      and higher than anticipated net realized gains from active portfolio management; and
  •   Other Revenue as a result of increased recoveries from external entities.
  •   This was partially offset by lower than expected Canada Health Transfer ($116 million) due to adjustment
      for prior years and a downward revision to the Alberta’s estimated population which reduced Alberta's
      entitlement.


  Actual revenue increased by $588 million over prior year mainly due to:
  •    Internal Government Transfers due to increased activity in addiction and mental health programs and
       tangible capital asset additions resulting in higher recognition of externally funded capital revenue;
  •    Transfers from Government of Canada mainly as a result of higher national entitlement and a stronger
       national population share for Alberta ($457 million) and new funding for Working Together to improve
       health care for Canadians ($93 million);
  •    Premiums, Fees and Licenses as a result of increased billing rates and higher volume of healthcare
       services billable to other Canadian jurisdictions and non-residents of Canada; and
  •    Investment Income as a result of increased interest and dividend due to favourable market conditions.
  •    This was partially offset by in-kind contribution of rapid test kits and other supplies received from
       Government of Canada in prior year to support the COVID-19 pandemic response.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                65
Financial Information



Consolidated Expenses (prior to inter-ministry consolidation adjustments)

                                  Information             Others*
                                 Technology                 1%
                 Support Services     3%
                      10%                                                             Physician
                                                                                   Compensation and
                 Administration                                                      Development
                     2%                                                                 23%

    Diagnostic,
Therapeutic & Other
 Patient Services
       11%
         Home Care                                                                             Drugs and
            3%                                                                             Supplemental Health
                                                                                                 Benefits
Community                                                                                         10%
  Care
   7%                                                                                  Population and Public
                                                                                              Health
               Emergency Medical                                                                4%
                                                               Acute Care
                   Services      Continuing Care
                                                                  18%
                     3%                5%


     * includes Ministry Support, Research and Education, Debt Servicing, Infrastructure Support, and Cancer Research and
     Prevention Investment.

     Total expense for the year was $27.5 billion, which was $796 million higher than budget mainly
     due to:
     •    Physician Compensation and Development primarily due to higher than anticipated claims and
          Clinical Alternative Relationship Plan expansions;
     •    Acute Care due to increased use of agency nursing, overtime, and relief due to ongoing vacancies,
          recruitment challenges, and increased sick leave;
     •    Population and Public Health due to valuation adjustment of in-kind contributed COVID-19 rapid
          tests resulting from reduced demand for the tests;
     •    Administration due to higher liability insurance costs for greater required reserves and timing of
          claim settlements, and additional finance and human resource costs related to the transition of lab
          services from DynaLIFEDX to AHS;
     •    Support Services due to higher utility costs resulting from inflation and carbon tax, valuation
          adjustment of personal protective equipment and other supplies inventory, and procurement and
          capital management costs due to transitioning lab services from DynaLIFEDX to AHS.

     This was partially offset by lower than budgeted expenses in:
     •    Community Care due to staggered timing of contract rate increases, less than expected designative
          supportive living bed openings, and recovery of prior year surplus COVID-19 funds from community
          care providers;
     •    Home Care due to delays in implementing home care innovations and palliative home care
          initiatives resulting from delayed operational planning, deferral of integrated funding model
          implementation, and delays in implementing rural home care travel and congregate living initiatives;



66                                                                                              Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                      Financial Information



  •    Emergency Medical Services due to delays in implementing certain initiatives resulting from
       ongoing vacancies and delays related to contract negotiations; and
  •    Infrastructure Support due to delayed program implementation as a result of resequencing of
       Continuing Care Capital grants.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                        67
Financial Information



     Certain program expenses indicate a significant increase compared to prior year due to COVID-
     19 expenses being allocated within the programs while in prior year they were reported as a
     separate line item.
     Actual expenses increased by $2.0 billion from prior year mainly due to:
     •   Physician Compensation and Development due to increased claims, Clinical Alternative
         Relationship Plan expansions, and additional compensation costs due to transitioning of lab
         services from DynaLIFEDX to AHS;
     •   Acute Care due to increased activities including utilization of oncology drugs, increases in inpatient
         days, emergency room visits, and surgeries performed related to the Alberta Surgical Initiative
         resulting in increased compensation costs, utilization of agency nursing staff, and overtime;
     •   Diagnostic, Therapeutic & Other Patient Services due to costs associated with the acquisition of
         DynaLIFEDX, increased lab testing, and CT and MRI testing. Higher amortization expense for
         equipment additions due to Arthur J.E. Child Comprehensive Cancer Centre and DynaLIFEDX
         further contributed to the increase;
     •   Drugs and Supplemental Health Benefits due to volume growth in various benefit programs and
         increased claims in Pharmaceutical Innovation and Management program. Increased utilization of
         high-cost oncology and rare disease drugs, and valuation adjustment related to children’s pain
         medication inventory further contributed to the increase;
     •   Community Care due to increased funding provided to supportive living providers and other
         community health providers under Continuing Care Transformation initiatives, and opening
         supportive-living and community mental health beds;
     •   Continuing Care primarily due to increased funding for the Aging With Dignity Grant from the
         federal bilateral agreement;
     •   Home Care due to contracted rate increases to agency home care providers, increased home care
         activity due to increased hours of care, and new client directed home care services;
     •   Population and Public Health primarily due to valuation adjustment of rapid tests and
         implementation of Modernizing Alberta's Primary Health Care System recommendations;
     •   Support Services due to increased utility costs resulting from inflation and carbon tax, higher food
         supplies costs, compensation increases, increased Connect Care education and training costs,
         increased costs related to building commissioning and operational readiness of the Arthur J.E.
         Child Comprehensive Cancer Centre, and additional procurement and capital management costs
         resulting from the transition of lab services from DynaLIFEDX to AHS;
     •   Administration due to higher liability insurance costs as a result of greater required reserves and
         timing of claim settlements, increased compensation costs, and administration costs for contracted
         health service providers.




68                                                                                 Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                         Financial Information



Expenses – Directly Incurred Detailed by Object (unaudited)
(in thousands)

                                       2024 Actual (unaudited)

                   Amortization of                  Consumption of
                   Tangible Capital                    Inventory
                  Assets & Financial                  $1,196,957
                  Transactions and                        4%
                        Other
                      $926,213
                         4%                                                   Grants
                                                                            $8,031,094
                                                                               29%




  Salaries, Wages and
   Employee Benefits
       $9,946,722
          36%



                                                                      Supplies and
                                                                        Services
                                                                       $7,401,672
                                                                          27%

  • Ministry’s expenses were primarily for grants, salaries, wages and employee benefits, and supplies
     and services which combined accounted for 92 per cent of the total expense.
  • Salaries, wages and employee benefits were $9.9 billion or 36 per cent of total expense, supporting
     delivery of health services across the province.
  • Grants were $8 billion or 29 per cent of total expense, primarily for Physician Compensation and
     Development, and Drugs and Supplemental Health Benefit programs. Other grant expenses
     included restricted funding to support organizations and communities through various programs or
     initiatives, and funding for out-of-province health services.
  • Supplies and services were $7.4 billion or 27 per cent of total expense, mainly attributed to contracts
     with voluntary and private health service providers, and various purchased supplies and services.
  • Amortization of tangible capital assets ($561 million), consumption of inventory ($1.2 billion), and
     financial transactions and other expenses ($365 million) comprised the balance of ministry’s total
     expense.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                           69
Financial Information




Supplemental Financial Information
Tangible Capital Assets (unaudited)
Year ended March 31, 2024
(in thousands)

                                Computer Hardware
                                  and Software               Land
                                    $700,916               $121,781
                        Equipment     7%                      1%
                         $708,586
                           7%

          Land Improvements
          & Leasehold Assets
               $170,018
                 1%




                                                                        Building
                                                                       $8,796,418
                                                                          84%




     • Total net book value of tangible capital assets was $10.5 billion.
     • Buildings are the largest component and account for $8.8 billion or 84 per cent of the ministry’s total
        tangible capital assets.
     • The remainder of the ministry’s tangible capital assets comprises of computer hardware and
        software, equipment, land, land improvements, and leasehold assets.
     • Tangible capital assets of the Ministry are recognized at historical cost and are amortized, excluding
        land, on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets.
     • Buildings and Equipment include $179 million (net of amortization) for obligations associated with
        retirement of tangible capital assets.




70                                                                                  Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                            Financial Information



Portfolio Investments (unaudited)


Year ended March 31, 2024
(in thousands)
                                                          2024                                2023
                                                  Cost            Fair Value         Cost             Fair Value
Interest bearing securities:
   Deposits and short-term securities        $      746,326   $        746,331   $     490,715    $        490,755
   Bonds and mortgages                            1,326,783          1,304,133       1,228,624           1,194,576
                                                  2,073,109          2,050,464       1,719,339           1,685,331
Equities:
  Canadian equities                                 181,927            199,709         171,926             177,151
  Global equities                                   224,040            299,807         228,896             273,522
                                                    405,967            499,516         400,822             450,673

Real estate                                          30,926             37,712          40,371              48,690
Total Portfolio Investments                 $     2,510,002   $      2,587,692   $   2,160,532   $       2,184,694



The following is a breakdown of portfolio investments:

                                                          2024                               2023
                                                  Cost         Fair Value            Cost         Fair Value
Operating                                   $     2,404,729 $     2,482,419      $   2,083,040 $     2,107,202
Endowments                                          105,273         105,273             77,492          77,492
Total Portfolio Investments                 $     2,510,002 $     2,587,692      $   2,160,532 $     2,184,694




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                               71
Financial Information




Financial Statements of Other Reporting Entities


Table of Contents
Index of Audited Financial Statements
         Alberta Health Services ....................................................................................................................... 73
         Health Quality Council of Alberta..................................................................................................129




72                                                                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                                                  Financial Information




Alberta Health Services
Financial Statements
Table of Contents

         Management Responsibility for Financial Reporting ............................................................. 74

         Independent Auditor’s Report ......................................................................................................... 75

         Consolidated Statement of Operations ......................................................................................... 78

         Consolidated Statement of Financial Position ........................................................................... 79

         Consolidated Statement of Change in Net Debt ........................................................................ 80

         Consolidated Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses .......................................... 81

         Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows ......................................................................................... 82

         Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements ...................................................................... 83

         Schedule 1 – Consolidated Schedule of Expenses by Object ..............................................117

         Schedule 2 – Schedules of Remuneration and Benefits .......................................................118

         Footnotes to the Schedules of Remuneration and Benefits ...............................................124

         Schedule 3 – Consolidated Schedule of Segment Disclosures ...........................................127

         Schedule 3 – Consolidate Schedule of Segment Disclosures (continued) ....................128




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                                                     73
Financial Information




Management Responsibility for Financial Reporting
The accompanying consolidated financial statements for the year ended March 31, 2024 are the
responsibility of management and have been reviewed and approved by senior management. The
consolidated financial statements were prepared in accordance with Canadian Public Sector
Accounting Standards and include certain disclosures required by the financial directives issued by
Alberta Health, and of necessity include some amounts based on estimates and judgment.

To discharge its responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of financial reporting, management
maintains systems of financial management and internal control which give consideration to costs,
benefits and risks that are designed to:

        provide reasonable assurance that transactions are properly authorized, executed in
         accordance with prescribed legislation and regulations, and properly recorded so as to
         maintain accountability of public funds;
        safeguard the assets and properties of the “Province of Alberta” that are the responsibility of
         Alberta Health Services.

Alberta Health Services carries out its responsibility for the consolidated financial statements
through the Finance, Audit and Risk Committee (the Committee). The Committee meets with
management and the Auditor General of Alberta to review financial matters, and recommends the
consolidated financial statements to the Alberta Health Services Board for approval upon finalization
of the audit. The Auditor General of Alberta has free access to the Committee.

The Auditor General of Alberta provides an independent audit of the consolidated financial
statements. His examination is conducted in accordance with Canadian Generally Accepted Auditing
Standards and includes tests and procedures which allow him to report on the fairness of the
consolidated financial statements prepared by management.




[Original signed by]                                    [Original signed by]

Athana Mentzelopoulos                                   Michael Lam, CPA, CA, CHE
President and Chief Executive Officer                   Interim Vice President, Corporate Services and Chief
Alberta Health Services                                 Financial Officer
                                                        Alberta Health Services




74                                                                            Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                     Financial Information




Independent Auditor’s Report



To the Members of the Alberta Health Services Board and the Minister of Health

Report on the Consolidated Financial Statements


Opinion
I have audited the consolidated financial statements of Alberta Health Services (the Group), which
comprise the consolidated statement of financial position as at March 31, 2024, and the
consolidated statements of operations, remeasurement gains and losses, change in net debt, and
cash flows for the year then ended, and notes to the consolidated financial statements, including a
summary of significant accounting policies.

In my opinion, the accompanying consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material
respects, the consolidated financial position of the Group as at March 31, 2024, and the results of its
operations, its remeasurement gains and losses, its changes in net debt, and its cash flows for the
year then ended in accordance with Canadian public sector accounting standards.

Basis for opinion
I conducted my audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards. My
responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor's Responsibilities for the
Audit of the Consolidated Financial Statements section of my report. I am independent of the Group in
accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to my audit of the consolidated financial
statements in Canada, and I have fulfilled my other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these
requirements. I believe that the audit evidence I have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to
provide a basis for my opinion.

Emphasis of matter
I draw attention to Note 29 of the consolidated financial statements, which describes the subsequent
events and restructuring/refocusing of the Group. My opinion is not modified in respect of this
matter.

Other information
Management is responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the
information included in the Annual Report, but does not include the consolidated financial
statements and my auditor’s report thereon. The Annual Report is expected to be made available to
me after the date of this auditor’s report.

My opinion on the consolidated financial statements does not cover the other information and I do
not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.

In connection with my audit of the consolidated financial statements, my responsibility is to read
the other information identified above and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is
materially inconsistent with the consolidated financial statements or my knowledge obtained in the
audit, or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                       75
Financial Information



If, based on the work I will perform on this other information, I conclude that there is a material
misstatement of this other information, I am required to communicate the matter to those charged
with governance.

Responsibilities of management and those charged with governance for the consolidated
financial statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the consolidated financial
statements in accordance with Canadian public sector accounting standards, and for such internal
control as management determines is necessary to enable the preparation of the consolidated
financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.

In preparing the consolidated financial statements, management is responsible for assessing the
Group’s ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going
concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless an intention exists to liquidate or to
cease operations, or there is no realistic alternative but to do so.

Those charged with governance are responsible for overseeing the Group’s financial reporting
process.

Auditor's responsibilities for the audit of the consolidated financial statements
My objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial
statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to
issue an auditor's report that includes my opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of
assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with Canadian generally
accepted auditing standards will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the
aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on
the basis of these consolidated financial statements.

As part of an audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards, I exercise
professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit. I also:
 Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements,
    whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks,
    and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion.
    The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one
    resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions,
    misrepresentations, or the override of internal control.
 Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit
    procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an
    opinion on the effectiveness of the Group’s internal control.
 Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting
    estimates and related disclosures made by management.
 Conclude on the appropriateness of management’s use of the going concern basis of accounting
    and, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to
    events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Group’s ability to continue as a going
    concern. If I conclude that a material uncertainty exists, I am required to draw attention in my
    auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the consolidated financial statements or, if such
    disclosures are inadequate, to modify my opinion. My conclusions are based on the audit




76                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                      Financial Information



    evidence obtained up to the date of my auditor’s report. However, future events or conditions
    may cause the Group to cease to continue as a going concern.
   Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the consolidated financial
    statements, including the disclosures, and whether the consolidated financial statements
    represent the underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation.
   Obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the financial information of the entities
    or business activities within the Group to express an opinion on the consolidated financial
    statements. I am responsible for the direction, supervision and performance of the group audit.
    I remain solely responsible for my audit opinion.

I communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the planned
scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in
internal control that I identify during my audit.




[Original signed by W. Doug Wylie FCPA, FCMA, ICD.D]
Auditor General

June 3, 2024
Edmonton, Alberta




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                        77
Financial Information




Consolidated Statement of Operations
Year ended March 31
(in thousands)
                                                                           2024                         2023
                                                                Budget             Actual              Actual
                                                                (Note 3)
 Revenues:
  Alberta Health transfers
    Base operating                                          $    15,137,611    $    15,138,434     $   13,446,558
    One-time base operating                                               -            286,083            185,146
    Other operating                                               1,655,938          1,712,435          2,467,695
    Recognition of expended deferred capital revenue                113,400            106,297            104,165
  Other government transfers (Note 4)                               470,718            527,925            475,512
  Fees and charges                                                  586,000            625,668            536,774
  Ancillary operations                                              110,000             87,178            103,324
  Donations and non-government
    contributions (Note 5)                                          182,000            213,382           189,244
  Investment and other income (Note 6)                              214,800            330,376           240,285

 TOTAL REVENUES                                                  18,470,467         19,027,778         17,748,703

 Expenses:
  Continuing care                                                 1,373,300          1,375,360          1,381,494
  Community care                                                  2,073,700          1,983,628          1,888,404
  Home care                                                         902,800            843,709            740,152
  Acute care                                                      5,788,067          6,084,875          5,594,950
  Emergency medical services                                        741,400            665,954            599,476
  Diagnostic and therapeutic services                             2,872,000          2,932,784          2,645,702
  Population and public health                                      500,200            439,173            589,216
  Research and education                                            363,500            352,707            341,797
  Information technology                                            775,000            793,775            749,085
  Support services (Note 7)                                       2,539,200          2,798,372          2,639,431
  Administration (Note 8)                                           541,300            573,810            495,326

 TOTAL EXPENSES (Schedules 1 and 3)                              18,470,467         18,844,147         17,665,033

 ANNUAL OPERATING SURPLUS                                                  -           183,631            83,670

 Accumulated surplus, beginning of year                           1,120,827          1,120,827          1,037,157
 Accumulated surplus, end of year (Note 21)                 $     1,120,827    $     1,304,458     $    1,120,827

       The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these consolidated financial statements.




78                                                                                 Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                Financial Information




Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
Year ended March 31
(in thousands)
                                                                              2024                   2023
                                                                             Actual                 Actual

 Financial Assets:
  Cash and cash equivalents                                           $           243,462   $             334,649
  Portfolio investments (Note 10)                                               2,587,692               2,184,694
  Accounts receivable (Note 11)                                                   755,525                 750,083
                                                                                3,586,679               3,269,426

 Liabilities:
  Accounts payable and accrued liabilities (Note 12)                            1,855,955               1,773,424
  Employee future benefits (Note 13)                                              818,539                 787,643
  Unexpended deferred operating revenue (Note 14)                                 697,922                 572,628
  Unexpended deferred capital revenue (Note 15)                                   214,072                 177,901
  Debt (Note 17)                                                                  415,813                 434,088
  Asset retirement obligations (Note 18)                                          539,421                 583,172
                                                                                4,541,722               4,328,856

 NET DEBT                                                                       (955,043)              (1,059,430)

 Non-Financial Assets:
  Tangible capital assets (Note 19)                                            10,467,655              10,303,649
  Inventories of supplies (Note 20)                                               197,169                 307,725
  Prepaid expenses, deposits, and other non-financial assets                      355,181                 231,254
                                                                               11,020,005              10,842,628
 NET ASSETS BEFORE EXPENDED DEFERRED REVENUE                                   10,064,962               9,783,198
 Expended deferred revenue (Note 16)                                            8,696,431               8,642,101

 NET ASSETS                                                                     1,368,531               1,141,097

 Net Assets is comprised of:
  Accumulated surplus (Note 21)                                                 1,304,458               1,120,827
  Accumulated remeasurement gains                                                  64,073                  20,270

                                                                      $         1,368,531   $           1,141,097


Contractual Obligations and Contingent Liabilities (Note 22)

The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these consolidated financial statements.

Approved by:



[Original signed by]                                                 [Original signed by]


 Dr. Lyle Oberg                                                           Paul George Haggis
 Executive Board Chair                                                    Finance, Audit & Risk Committee Chair
 Alberta Health Services                                                  Alberta Health Services




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                  79
Financial Information




Consolidated Statement of Change in Net Debt
Year ended March 31
(in thousands)

                                                                                2024                          2023
                                                                     Budget              Actual              Actual
                                                                     (Note 3)

     Annual operating surplus                                    $               -   $      183,631     $        83,670

     Effect of changes in tangible capital assets:
      Acquisition of tangible capital assets:
        Purchased                                                      (530,000)           (452,501)          (497,852)
        Purchased as part of DynaLIFEDX asset purchase                         -            (71,760)                  -
        Leased                                                          (10,000)            (37,753)           (19,031)
        Constructed by Alberta Infrastructure on behalf of AHS         (457,000)           (198,774)          (262,429)
        Contributed by others                                                  -                 (24)              (35)
        Revision to asset retirement cost estimates                            -              41,773           (41,164)
      Amortization and loss on disposals/write-downs of
        tangible capital assets                                         527,500             555,033            514,897

     Effect of other changes:
      Net increase in expended deferred capital revenue                 485,600             170,966            246,496
      Net decrease in expended deferred operating
         revenue                                                       (161,000)           (116,636)          (220,336)
      Net decrease (increase) in inventories of supplies               (123,000)             118,442            205,294
      Net increase in prepaid expenses, deposits
         and other non-financial assets                                 (19,000)           (118,968)           (54,684)
      Net increase in non-financial assets due to DynaLIFEDX
         acquisition                                                           -            (12,845)                  -
      Net remeasurement gains (losses) for the year                      (7,000)              43,803            (4,616)
     Decrease (increase) in net debt for the year                      (293,900)            104,387            (49,790)

     Net debt, beginning of year                                     (1,059,430)         (1,059,430)        (1,009,640)

     Net debt, end of year                                       $ (1,353,330)       $     (955,043)    $   (1,059,430)



      The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these consolidated financial statements.




80                                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                              Financial Information




Consolidated Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses
Year ended March 31
(in thousands)


                   CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF REMEASUREMENT GAINS AND LOSSES
                                     YEAR ENDED MARCH 31
                                                             2024                                     2023
                                                            Actual                                   Actual


  Unrestricted unrealized gains (losses) attributable to:
   Derivatives                                                                 $       586       $            2,572
                                                                                                                  2
   Portfolio investments
    Quoted in an active market                                                       6,600                (3,208)
    Designated at fair value                                                        35,815               (36,392)

  Amounts reclassified to the Consolidated Statement of Operations:
   Derivatives                                                                       (998)                 (1,710)

   Portfolio investments
    Quoted in an active market                                                           -                      -
    Designated at fair value                                                         1,800                 34,122

  Net remeasurement gains (losses) for the year                                     43,803                 (4,616)
  Accumulated remeasurement gains, beginning of year                                20,270                 24,886
  Accumulated remeasurement gains, end of year (Note 10)                   $        64,073       $         20,270


         The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these consolidated financial statements.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                 81
Financial Information




Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
Year ended March 31
(in thousands)
                                                                          2024                     2023
                                                                         Actual                   Actual

 Operating transactions:
  Annual operating surplus                                        $            183,631      $               83,670
  Non-cash items:
     Amortization and loss on disposals/write-downs of
       tangible capital assets                                                 555,033                   514,897
     Revenue recognized for acquisition of land                                      -                    (3,934)
     Recognition of expended deferred capital revenue                        (355,407)                 (328,651)
     Recognition of expended deferred operating revenue                      (116,636)                 (289,853)
     (Gain) loss on disposal of portfolio investments                         (13,736)                    32,218
     Change in employee future benefits                                         24,268                      9,765
  (Increase) decrease in:
     Accounts receivable related to operating transactions                    (14,564)                 (155,654)
     Inventories of supplies                                                   118,442                   205,294
     Prepaid expenses, deposits, and other non-financial assets              (118,968)                  (54,684)
  Increase (decrease) in:
     Accounts payable and accrued liabilities                                   23,669                 (171,577)
     Unexpended deferred operating revenue                                     115,570                    59,541
     Asset retirement obligations                                               (1,978)                  (2,409)
     Cash provided by (applied to) operating transactions                      399,324                 (101,377)

 Capital transactions:
   Purchased tangible capital assets                                         (452,501)                 (497,852)
   DynaLIFEDX purchase consideration net of cash acquired                     (29,388)                         -
  Cash applied to capital transactions                                       (481,889)                 (497,852)

 Investing transactions:
   Purchase of portfolio investments                                        (5,284,617)              (4,110,544)
   Proceeds on disposals of portfolio investments                             4,948,882                4,476,003
   Cash (applied to) provided by investing transactions                       (335,735)                  365,459

 Financing transactions:
   Restricted operating contributions received                                        -                    69,517
   Restricted capital contributions received                                   367,372                   345,074
   Unexpended deferred capital revenue returned                                 (3,626)                       (73)
   Proceeds from debt                                                            20,000                    11,500
   Principal payments on debt                                                  (38,275)                  (32,405)
   Payments on obligations under capital leases                                (17,745)                  (25,639)
   Net repayment of life lease deposits                                           (613)                     (246)
   Cash provided by financing transactions                                     327,113                   367,728

 (Decrease) increase in cash and cash equivalents                              (91,187)                    133,958

 Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year                                  334,649                     200,691

 Cash and cash equivalents, end of year                           $            243,462      $              334,649

The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these consolidated financial statements.




82                                                                                 Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                   Financial Information




Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
Year ended March 31
(in thousands)
   Note 1     Authority, Purpose and Operations
            Alberta Health Services (AHS) was established under the Regional Health Authorities Act (Alberta),
            effective April 1, 2009, as a result of the merger of 12 formerly separate health entities in Alberta.

            Pursuant to Section 5 of the Regional Health Authorities Act (Alberta), AHS is responsible in Alberta to:
             promote and protect the health of the population and work toward the prevention of disease and injury;
             assess on an ongoing basis the health needs of the population;
             determine priorities in the provision of health services and allocate resources accordingly;
             ensure that reasonable access to quality health services is provided and;
             promote the provision of health services in a manner that is responsive to the needs of individuals and
               communities and supports the integration of services and facilities.

            Additionally, AHS is accountable to the Minister of Health (the Minister) for the delivery and operation of
            the public health system.

            The AHS consolidated financial statements include the assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses
            associated with its responsibilities.

   Note 2     Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices

         (a) Basis of Presentation
             These consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with Canadian Public Sector
             Accounting Standards. In addition, the consolidated financial statements include certain disclosures
             required by the financial directives issued by Alberta Health (AH).

             These consolidated financial statements reflect the assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses of the
             reporting entity, which is comprised of the organizations controlled by AHS as noted below:

             (i)   Controlled Entities
                    AHS controls the following three wholly owned subsidiaries:
                     Alberta Precision Laboratories Ltd. - provides medical diagnostic services throughout Alberta.
                     CapitalCare Group Inc. - manages continuing care programs and facilities in the Edmonton
                      area.
                     Carewest - manages continuing care programs and facilities in the Calgary area.

                    AHS has majority representation on, or the right to appoint, the governance boards, indicating
                    control of the following entities:

                     Foundations:

                      The largest foundations controlled by AHS are the Alberta Cancer Foundation and the Calgary
                      Health Foundation. AHS also controls 33 other foundations that facilitate fundraising for various
                      initiatives including enhancements to healthcare delivery (including equipment), programs,
                      renovations, and research and education.

                     Provincial Health Authorities of Alberta Liability and Property Insurance Plan (LPIP):

                      The LPIP’s main purpose is to share the risks of general and professional liability to lessen the
                      impact on any one healthcare subscriber. Effective April 1, 2020, the LPIP ceased providing new
                      liability coverage and continues in operation for the limited purpose of winding up its affairs.

                      The LPIP has a fiscal year end of December 31, 2023. Significant transactions occurring
                      between this date and March 31, 2024 have been recorded in these consolidated financial
                      statements.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                     83
Financial Information



     Note 2      Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)
                     All inter-entity accounts and transactions between these organizations and AHS are eliminated
                     upon consolidation.

          (ii)    Government Partnerships
                   AHS proportionately consolidates its 50% ownership interests in 39 (2023 – 40) Primary Care
                   Network (PCN) partnerships with physician groups, its 50% ownership interest in the Northern Alberta
                   Clinical Trials Centre (NACTRC) partnership with the University of Alberta, and its 33.33% ownership
                   interest in the Institute for Reconstructive Sciences in Medicine (iRSM) partnership with the University
                   of Alberta and Covenant Health (Note 24).

                   AHS entered into local primary care initiative agreements to jointly manage and operate the delivery
                   of primary care services to achieve the PCN plan objectives, and to contract and hold property
                   interests required in the delivery of PCN services.

                   All inter-entity accounts and transactions between these organizations and AHS are eliminated upon
                   consolidation.

          (iii) Trusts under Administration
                   These consolidated financial statements do not include trusts administered on behalf of others
                   (Note 25).

          (iv)    Other

                   AHS is responsible for the delivery and operation of the public health system in Alberta (Note 1) and
                   contracts with various voluntary and private health service providers to provide health services
                   throughout Alberta. The largest of these service providers is Covenant Health, a denominational
                   health care organization, providing a full spectrum of care including operating several hospitals and
                   long-term care facilities. Covenant Health is an independent, separate legal entity with a separate
                   Board of Directors and accordingly, these consolidated financial statements do not include their
                   assets, liabilities or results of operations. However, the payments for contracts with health service
                   providers such as Covenant Health are recorded as expenses in the Consolidated Statement of
                   Operations.

                   In addition, AHS provides administrative services to certain foundations and contracted health care
                   providers not included in these consolidated financial statements.

                 (b) Revenue Recognition

                   All revenues are recorded on an accrual basis, except when the accrual cannot be determined within
                   a reasonable degree of certainty or when estimation is impracticable. Revenues from transactions
                   with performance obligations are recognized when AHS provides the promised goods and/or services
                   to a payor. Revenue from transactions with no performance obligations are recognized at their
                   realizable value when AHS has the authority to claim or retain an inflow of economic resources and
                   identifies a past transaction or event that gives rise to an asset. Unallocated costs comprising of
                   materials and services contributed by related parties in support of AHS’ operations, are not
                   recognized in these consolidated financial statements.

                    (i)   Government Transfers

                          Transfers from AH, other Province of Alberta ministries and agencies, and other government
                          entities are referred to as government transfers.

                          Government transfers and, if applicable, the associated externally restricted investment income
                          are recorded as deferred revenue if the eligibility criteria for the use of the transfer, or the
                          stipulations together with AHS’ actions and communications as to the use of the transfer, create
                          a liability. These transfers are recognized as revenue as the stipulations are met and, when
                          applicable, AHS complies with the communicated use of the transfer.

                          All other government transfers, without stipulations for the use of the transfer, are recorded as
                          revenue when the transfer is authorized and AHS meets the eligibility criteria.




84                                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                   Financial Information



   Note 2     Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)
                Deferred revenue consists of unexpended deferred operating revenue (Note 14), unexpended
                deferred capital revenue (Note 15), expended deferred capital revenue (Note 16(a)) and expended
                deferred operating revenue (Note 16(b)). The term deferred revenue in these consolidated financial
                statements refers to the components of deferred revenue as described.

            (ii) Donations and Non-Government Contributions

                 Donations and non-government contributions are received from individuals, corporations, registered
                 charities, and other not-for-profit organizations. Donations and non-government contributions may be
                 unrestricted or externally restricted for operating or capital purposes.

                 Unrestricted donations, and non-government contributions are recorded as revenue in the year
                 received or in the year the funds are committed to AHS if the amount can be reasonably estimated
                 and collection is reasonably assured.

                 Externally restricted donations, non-government contributions, and the associated externally
                 restricted investment income are recorded as deferred revenue if the terms for their use, or the terms
                 along with AHS’ actions and communications as to their use create a liability. These resources are
                 recognized as revenue as the terms are met and, when applicable, AHS complies with the
                 communicated use.

                 In-kind contributions of services and materials from non-related parties are recorded at fair value
                 when such value can reasonably be determined. While volunteers contribute a significant amount of
                 time each year to assist AHS, the value of their services is not recognized as revenue and expenses
                 in the consolidated financial statements because fair value cannot be reasonably determined.

                 Endowment contributions are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Operations in the period
                 in which they are received or receivable.

            (iii) Transfers and Donations related to Land
                  Transfers and donations for the purchase of land are recorded as deferred revenue when received
                  and as revenue when the land is purchased. In-kind donations of land from non-related entities are
                  recorded as revenue at the fair value of the land. When AHS cannot determine the fair value, it
                  records such donations at nominal value. In-kind donations of land from related entities are recorded
                  as revenue at the net book value of the transferring entity.

            (iv) Fees and Charges, Ancillary Operations, and Other Income

                 Fees and charges, ancillary operations, and other income are considered revenue arising from
                 exchange transactions with performance obligations. These are recognized in the year that goods
                 are delivered or services are provided by AHS. Amounts received for which goods or services have
                 not been provided by year end are recorded as deferred revenue.

            (v) Investment Income

                 Investment income includes dividend income, interest income, and realized gains or losses on the
                 sale of portfolio investments. Unrealized gains and losses on portfolio investments (excluding gains
                 or losses from restricted transfers, endowments, or donations) are recognized in the Consolidated
                 Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses until the related portfolio investments are sold.
                 When realized, these gains or losses are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Operations.
                 Investment income and unrealized gains and losses from restricted transfers including endowments
                 or donations are deferred until recognized according to the provisions within the individual funding
                 agreements.

             (c) Expenses

                 Expenses are reported on an accrual basis. The cost of all goods consumed and services received
                 during the year are expensed. Interest expense includes debt servicing costs.

                 Expenses include grants and transfers under shared cost agreements. Grants and transfers are
                 recorded as expenses when the transfer is authorized and eligibility criteria have been met by the
                 recipient.



Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                     85
Financial Information



     Note 2    Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

        (d)   Financial Instruments
              Financial instruments comprise financial assets and financial liabilities. Financial assets are assets that
              could be used to discharge existing liabilities or finance future operations and are not for consumption in
              the normal course of operations. Financial liabilities are contractual obligations to deliver cash or another
              financial asset to another entity or to exchange financial instruments with another entity under conditions
              that are potentially unfavourable to AHS.

              All of AHS’ financial assets and financial liabilities are initially recorded at their fair value. The following
              table identifies AHS’ financial assets and financial liabilities and identifies how they are subsequently
              measured:

              Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities           Subsequent Measurement and Recognition
              Portfolio investments                                Measured at fair value with unrealized changes in fair
                                                                   values recognized in the Consolidated Statement of
                                                                   Remeasurement Gains and Losses or deferred revenue
                                                                   until realized, at which time the cumulative changes in
                                                                   fair value are recognized in the Consolidated Statement
                                                                   of Operations.

              Cash and cash equivalents, accounts                  Measured at cost or amortized cost.
              receivable, payroll payable and related accrued
              liabilities, trade accounts payable and accrued
              liabilities, other liabilities and debt

              Amortized cost is the amount at which a financial instrument asset or a financial instrument liability is
              measured at initial recognition minus principal repayments, plus or minus the cumulative amortization
              using the effective interest method of any difference between that initial amount and the maturity amount,
              and minus any reduction (directly or through the use of an allowance account) for impairment or
              uncollectibility.

              AHS records equity investments quoted in an active market at fair value and may choose to record other
              financial assets under the fair value category if there is an investment strategy to evaluate the
              performance of a group of these financial assets on a fair value basis. AHS has elected to record all
              portfolio investments at fair value. The three levels of information that are used to measure fair value
              are disclosed in Note 10.

              Derivatives are recorded at fair value in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. Derivatives
              with a positive or negative fair value are recognized as increases or decreases to portfolio investments
              respectively. Unrealized gains and losses from changes in the fair value of derivatives are recognized in
              the Consolidated Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses until realized, at which time the gains
              or losses are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Operations.

              Contractual obligations are evaluated for the existence of embedded derivatives. AHS measures and
              recognizes embedded derivatives separately from the host contract when the economic characteristics
              and risk of the embedded derivative are not closely related to those of the host contract, when it meets
              the definition of a derivative and when the entire contract is not measured at fair value. An election can
              be made to either measure the entire contract at fair value or measure the value of the derivative
              component separately when characteristics of the derivative are not closely related to the economic
              characteristics and risks of the contract itself. Contracts to buy or sell non-financial items for AHS’ normal
              course of business are not recognized as financial assets or liabilities. AHS does not have any embedded
              derivatives.

              All financial assets are assessed for impairment on an annual basis. When a decline is determined to be
              other than temporary, the amount of the loss is reported as a realized loss on the Consolidated Statement
              of Operations. A write-down of a portfolio investment to reflect a loss in value is not reversed for a
              subsequent increase in value.

              A financial liability or a part thereof is derecognized when it is extinguished.




86                                                                                           Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                      Financial Information



   Note 2      Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

               Transaction costs associated with the acquisition and disposal of portfolio investments are expensed as
               incurred. Investment management fees are expensed as incurred. The purchase and disposition of
               portfolio investments are recognized on the trade date.

         (e) Cash and Cash Equivalents
             Cash is comprised of cash on hand and demand deposits. Cash equivalents include amounts in interest
             bearing accounts and are subject to an insignificant risk of change in value. Cash and cash equivalents
             are held for the purpose of meeting short-term commitments rather than for investment purposes.

         (f)   Accounts receivable
               Accounts receivable are recognized at the lower of cost or net recoverable value. A valuation allowance
               is recognized when recovery is uncertain.

         (g) Inventories of Supplies
             Purchased inventories of supplies are valued at lower of cost (defined as moving average cost) and
             replacement cost. Contributed inventories of supplies are recorded at fair value when such value can
             reasonably be determined.

         (h) Tangible Capital Assets
             Tangible capital assets are recorded at cost less accumulated amortization, which includes amounts that
             are directly related to the acquisition, design, construction, development, improvement, or betterment of
             the assets. Cost includes overhead directly attributable to construction and development as well as
             interest costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition or construction of the asset, and asset
             retirement cost. Costs incurred by Alberta Infrastructure (AI) to construct tangible capital assets on behalf
             of AHS are recorded by AHS as work in progress as AI incurs costs.

               Contributed tangible capital assets from non-related entities are recognized at their fair value at the date
               of the contribution when fair value can be reasonably determined. When AHS cannot determine the fair
               value, it records such contributions at nominal value.

               The costs less residual values of tangible capital assets, excluding land, are amortized over their
               estimated useful lives on a straight-line basis as follows:
                                                                                 Useful Life
                        Facilities and improvements                              10-70 years
                        Equipment                                                3-20 years
                        Information systems                                      3-15 years
                        Building service equipment                               5-40 years
                        Land improvements                                        5-40 years

               Work in progress, which includes facility and improvement projects and development of information
               systems, is not amortized until after a project is substantially complete and the tangible capital assets
               are available for use.

               Leases of tangible capital assets which transfer substantially all benefits and risks of ownership to AHS
               are accounted for as leased tangible capital assets and leasehold improvements and are amortized over
               the shorter of the term of the lease or their estimated useful lives. Obligations under capital leases are
               recorded at the present value of the minimum lease payments excluding executory costs (e.g. insurance,
               maintenance costs, etc.). The discount rate used to determine the present value of the lease payments
               is the lower of AHS’ rate for incremental borrowing and the interest rate implicit in the lease.

               Tangible capital assets are written down to their net recoverable amount when conditions indicate that
               they no longer contribute to AHS’ ability to provide goods and services or when the value of future
               economic benefits associated with the tangible capital assets are less than their net book value. Write-
               downs are recorded as part of amortization and loss on disposals / write-downs of tangible capital assets.

               Intangibles and other assets inherited by right and that have not been purchased are not recognized in
               these consolidated financial statements. Similarly, works of art, historical treasures, and collections are
               not recognized as tangible capital assets.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                         87
Financial Information




88                      Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                   Financial Information




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                     89
Financial Information




90                      Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                   Financial Information




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                     91
Financial Information




92                      Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                   Financial Information




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                     93
Financial Information




     Note 9    Financial Risk Management (continued)

                  The following table summarizes AHS’ investment in debt securities by counterparty credit rating at
                  March 31.
                  The unrated securities consist of low volatility pooled mortgages that are not rated on an active
                  market.

                        Credit Rating                                             2024                     2023
                        AAA                                                        58%                      51%
                        AA                                                         10%                      19%
                        A                                                          17%                      14%
                        BBB                                                        11%                      12%
                        Unrated                                                    4%                        4%
                                                                                  100%                     100%

              (a) Liquidity Risk

                  Liquidity risk is the risk that AHS will encounter difficulty under both normal and stressed conditions
                  in meeting obligations associated with financial liabilities that are settled by delivery of cash and
                  cash equivalents or another financial asset. Liquidity requirements of AHS are met through funding
                  provided by AH, income generated from portfolio investments, and by investing in liquid assets, such
                  as money market securities, fixed income securities and equities traded in an active market that are
                  easily sold and converted to cash. Short-term borrowing to meet financial obligations would be
                  available through established credit facilities, which have not been drawn upon, as described in Note
                  17(b).

                  AHS issued debentures and the committed repayments with respect to these debentures are
                  described in Note 17(c). The following are contractual maturities of the remaining financial liabilities
                  as at March 31, 2024, based on expected undiscounted cash flows.

                                                       Due in less than 1 year    Due in 1-5 years Due after 5 years
                    Payroll payable and
                     related accrued liabilities   $                   816,482     $              -   $                  -
                    Trade accounts payable
                     and accrued liabilities                            692,594                  -                     -
                    Other liabilities                                     6,930             13,056                 5,961
                                                    $                 1,516,006    $        13,056    $            5,961




94                                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                      Financial Information



    Note 10 Portfolio Investments

                                                                         2024                           2023
                                                                Fair Value            Cost     Fair Value    Cost
                Cash held for investing purposes               $    131,690 $         131,690 $ 122,940 $ 122,940

                Interest bearing securities:
                  Money market securities                            614,641        614,636           367,815        367,775
                  Fixed income securities                          1,304,133      1,326,783         1,194,576      1,228,624
                                                                   1,918,774      1,941,419         1,562,391      1,596,399
                Equities:
                 Canadian equity investments and funds               199,709          181,927        177,151        171,926
                 Global equity investments and funds                 299,807          224,040        273,522        228,896
                                                                     499,516          405,967        450,673        400,822

                 Real estate pooled funds                                37,712        30,926         48,690            40,371

                                                               $ 2,587,692 $ 2,510,002 $ 2,184,694 $ 2,160,532

                                                                                      2024                       2023
                Items at fair value
                  Portfolio investments designated to the fair value
                   category                                                  $          2,509,350        $        2,121,012
                  Portfolio investments in equity instruments that are
                   quoted in an active market                                              77,908                    62,836
                  Derivative asset, net                                                       434                       846
                                                                             $          2,587,692        $        2,184,694

              As at March 31, 2024, included in portfolio investments is $188,142 (2023 – $187,959) that is restricted
              for use as per the requirements in Sections 99 and 100 of the Insurance Act (Alberta). Endowment
              principal included in portfolio investments amounts to $105,273 (2023 – $77,492).

              The following are the total net remeasurement gains on portfolio investments:

                                                                                          2024                   2023
                Accumulated remeasurement gains                                   $          64,073          $     20,270
                Restricted unrealized net gains attributable to unexpended
                 deferred operating revenue (Note 14(b))                                        13,617               3,892
                                                                                  $             77,690       $      24,162




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                           95
Financial Information



     Note 10    Portfolio Investments (continued)

                Fair Value Hierarchy

                    The three levels of information that are used to measure fair value are:

                            Level 1 – Unadjusted quoted market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities;
                            Level 2 – Observable or corroborated inputs, other than level 1, such as quoted prices for
                             similar assets or liabilities in inactive markets or market data for substantially the full term
                             of the assets or liabilities; and
                            Level 3 – Unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and that are
                             significant to the fair value of the assets and liabilities.


                                                                                         2024
                                                           Level 1               Level 2      Level 3                       Total
                Cash held for investing purposes       $             -       $     131,690 $          -             $        131,690
                Interest bearing securities:
                  Money market securities                            -             614,641                  -                 614,641
                  Fixed income securities                            -           1,252,966             51,167               1,304,133
                Equities:
                  Canadian equity investments                   77,908             121,801                  -                   199,709
                   and funds
                  Global equity investments and
                   funds                                             -             299,807                  -                 299,807
                Real estate pooled funds                             -                   -             37,712                  37,712
                                                       $        77,908       $   2,420,905     $       88,879       $       2,587,692
                Percent of total                                   3%                 94%                 3%                    100%

                                                                                          2023
                                                               Level 1           Level 2       Level 3                          Total
                Cash held for investing purposes           $             -   $     122,940 $           -                $        122,940
                Interest bearing securities:
                  Money market securities                                -          367,815                  -                367,815
                  Fixed income securities                                -        1,143,251             51,325              1,194,576
                Equities:
                  Canadian equity investments and               62,836             114,315                      -                177,151
                   funds
                  Global equity investments and
                   funds                                             -              273,522                  -                273,522
                Real estate pooled funds                             -                    -             48,690                 48,690
                                                           $    62,836       $    2,021,843    $       100,015          $   2,184,694
                Percent of total                                   3%                  93%                 4%                   100%

                Reconciliation of Investments classified as level 3

                                                                                                      2024
                                                                              Fixed income           Real estate
                                                                                securities         pooled funds                  Total
               Beginning of year                                             $       51,325        $      48,690            $    100,015
               Purchases                                                              2,015                     -                   2,015
               Sales                                                                   (333)            (11,129)                 (11,462)
               Realized (loss) gain                                                     (21)               1,684                    1,663
               Gain (loss) included in the Consolidated Statement
                 of Remeasurement Gains and Losses                                       595              (1,533)                   (938)
               Transfers out(i)                                                      (2,414)                    -                 (2,414)
               End of year                                                   $       51,167        $      37,712            $     88,879




96                                                                                                 Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                         Financial Information



   Note 10     Portfolio Investments (continued)

                                                                                               2023
                                                                          Fixed income        Real estate
                                                                           securities       pooled funds            Total
             Beginning of year                                          $        51,053     $      45,027       $    96,080
             Purchases                                                            2,266                   -           2,266
             Sales                                                                (857)                   -           (857)
             Realized loss                                                          (68)                  -             (68)
             (Loss) gain included in the Consolidated Statement
               of Remeasurement Gains and Losses                                 (1,999)               3,663        1,664
             Transfers in(i)                                                         930                   -          930
             End of year                                                $        51,325     $         48,690    $ 100,015

                   (i)   Transfers are attributable to changes in the observability of market data.

   Note 11     Accounts Receivable

                                                                           2024                                 2023
                                                                       Allowance
                                                         Gross        for Doubtful          Net                 Net
                                                                       Accounts
             AH operating transfers receivable    $       168,549    $           - $        168,549 $               324,146
             Other capital transfers receivable           105,534                -          105,534                 108,535
             Patient accounts receivable                  160,934           44,350          116,584                  86,584
             Drugs rebates receivable                     105,960                -          105,960                  87,031
             AH capital transfers receivable               20,497                -           20,497                  10,922
             Other operating transfers receivable          50,050                -           50,050                  38,117
             Other accounts receivable                    198,011            9,660          188,351                  94,748
                                                  $       809,535    $      54,010 $        755,525 $               750,083

               Accounts receivable are unsecured and non-interest bearing. At March 31, 2023, the total allowance for
               doubtful accounts was $57,791 of which $48,229 related to patient accounts receivable.


   Note 12     Accounts Payable and Accrued Liabilities

                                                                                      2024                      2023
             Payroll payable and related accrued liabilities                 $               816,482      $        697,925
             Trade accounts payable and accrued liabilities                                  692,594               749,089
             Provision for unpaid claims(a)                                                  167,598               164,312
             Obligations under capital leases(b)                                             142,882               122,977
             Other liabilities                                                                36,399                39,121
                                                                             $             1,855,955      $      1,773,424

               As at March 31, 2024, accounts payable and accrued liabilities includes payables related to the
               purchase of tangible capital assets of $237,885 (2023 – $237,507). Of these amounts, $9,166 (2023 –
               $9,779) comprise life lease deposits received from tenants of certain AHS’ long term care facilities, and
               obligations under capital leases of $142,882 (2023 – $122,977).

              (a) Provision for unpaid claims is an actuarial estimate of liability claims against AHS. It is influenced by
                  factors such as historical trends involving claim payment patterns, loss payments, number of unpaid
                  claims, claims severity and claim frequency patterns.

                  The provision has been actuarially estimated using the discounted value of claim liabilities using a
                  discount rate of 4.37% (2023 – 3.80%).




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                           97
Financial Information



     Note 12   Accounts Payable and Accrued Liabilities (continued)

               (b) Obligations under capital leases include site leases with the University of Calgary, vehicle and
                   equipment leases, site leases for ambulance services and a community care service facility.

                   The obligations will be settled between 2025 and 2041 and have an implicit interest rate payable
                   ranging from 2.53% to 5.41% (2023 – 2.53% to 5.07%).

                   AHS is committed to making payments for obligations under capital leases as follows:

                                     Year ended March 31                             Minimum Contract Payments
                                            2025                                 $              24,071
                                            2026                                                22,366
                                            2027                                                19,928
                                            2028                                                15,794
                                            2029                                                11,076
                                          Thereafter                                            71,055
                                                                                               164,290
                                         Less: interest                                        (21,408)
                                                                                 $             142,882


     Note 13   Employee Future Benefits

                                                                                       2024                  2023
                 Accrued vacation pay                                        $            680,804     $        646,664
                 Accumulating non-vesting sick leave(a)                                   137,552              140,592
                 SERP pension plans                                                           183                  387
                                                                             $            818,539     $        787,643

               (a) Accumulating Non-Vesting Sick Leave

                   Sick leave benefits are paid by AHS; there are no employee contributions and no assets set aside
                   to support the obligation.

                                                                                 2024                     2023
                    Funded status – deficit                              $          99,365    $                   91,650
                    Unamortized net actuarial gain                                  38,187                        48,942
                    Accrued benefit liability                            $         137,552    $                  140,592

                   Key assumptions used in the determination of the accumulating non-vesting sick leave liability are:

                                                                                          2024               2023
                    Estimated average remaining service life                              10 years           10 years
                    Draw down rate of accumulated non-vesting sick leave bank              18.30%              18.30%
                    Discount rate – beginning of year                                       5.60%               2.50%
                    Discount rate – end of year                                             5.00%               5.60%
                    Rate of compensation increase per year                                 2023-24            2022-23
                                                                                            2.25%               1.60%
                                                                                           2024-25            2023-24
                                                                                            2.00%               2.25%
                                                                                           2025-26            2024-25
                                                                                            2.00%               2.00%
                                                                                         Thereafter         Thereafter
                                                                                            2.75%               2.75%




98                                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                          Financial Information



   Note 13    Employee Future Benefits (continued)

             (b) Local Authorities Pension Plan (LAPP)

                  (i)     AHS Participation in the LAPP

                          The majority of AHS employees participate in the LAPP. AHS’ employees comprise
                          approximately 46% (2023 - 47%) of the total membership in LAPP. AHS is not responsible for
                          future funding of the plan deficit other than through contribution increases. As AHS is exposed
                          to the risk of contribution rate increases, the following disclosure is provided to explain this risk.

                          The LAPP provides for a pension of 1.4% for each year of pensionable service based on the
                          average salary of the highest five consecutive years up to the average Canada Pension Plan’s
                          Year’s Maximum Pensionable Earnings (YMPE), over the same five consecutive year period
                          and 2.0% on the excess, subject to the maximum pension benefit limit allowed under the Income
                          Tax Act (Canada). The maximum pensionable service allowable under the plan is 35 years.
                  (ii)
                         LAPP Surplus

                          The LAPP carried out an actuarial valuation as at December 31, 2022 and these results were
                          then extrapolated to December 31, 2023.

                                                                             December 31, 2023         December 31, 2022
                            LAPP net assets available for benefits          $      63,337,859          $     58,747,000
                            LAPP pension obligation                                48,281,339                46,076,000
                            LAPP surplus                                    $      15,056,520          $     12,671,000

                          The 2024 and 2023 LAPP contribution rates are as follows:

                                     Calendar 2024                                          Calendar 2023
                          Employer                Employees                      Employer                Employees
                     8.45% of pensionable 7.45% of pensionable              8.45% of pensionable 7.45% of pensionable
                       earnings up to the      earnings up to the             earnings up to the      earnings up to the
                     YMPE and 11.65% of YMPE and 10.65% of                  YMPE and 12.23% of YMPE and 11.23% of
                          the excess              the excess                     the excess              the excess

             (c) Pension Expense

                                                                                              2024                   2023
                        Local Authorities Pension Plan                               $         521,199       $       462,649
                        Defined contribution pension plans and group RRSPs                      41,331                39,651
                        Other pension plans                                                      1,727                  (253)
                                                                                     $         564,257       $       502,047




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                                99
Financial Information




100                     Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                 Financial Information



   Note 14     Unexpended Deferred Operating Revenue (continued)

             (a)   The unexpended deferred operating revenue balance at the end of the year is externally restricted
                   for the following purposes:

                                                                            2024                 2023
                                                                     Other    Donors and
                                                            AH     Governme      Non-    Total   Total
                                                                      nt     Government
             Research and education                       $ 4,222 $ 2,741 $ 255,047 $ 262,010 $ 200,129
             Cancer prevention, screening and               83,490       197       3,814  87,501  74,806
              treatment
             Addiction and mental health                         -     60,278         1,868      62,146       55,053
             Acute care                                      8,369      1,413        41,720      51,502       51,902
             Support services                                6,756      5,513        32,939      45,208       40,270
             Physician revenue and alternate                42,527      2,181             -      44,708       49,196
              relationship plans
             Primary Care Networks                          29,240         -              -      29,240       23,150
             Diagnostic and therapeutic services            21,639       594            847      23,080       22,694
             Emergency medical services                     19,936     1,053            255      21,244          200
             Long term care partnerships                         -    20,171              -      20,171       19,508
             Population and public heath                     1,941    14,926          1,163      18,030       21,859
             Others individually less than $10,000           8,845        40         10,580      19,465        9,969
                                                           226,965   109,107        348,233     684,305      568,736
             Unrealized net (loss) gain attributable to
              portfolio investments related to
              endowments and unexpended deferred
              operating revenue (Note 10)                    (1,197)    2,152        12,662    13,617     3,892
                                                          $ 225,768 $ 111,259 $     360,895 $ 697,922 $ 572,628




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                  101
Financial Information



      Note 15   Unexpended Deferred Capital Revenue

          (a)    Changes in the unexpended deferred capital revenue balance are as follows:

                                                                                  2024                                       2023
                                                                                           Donors and
                                                                          Other
                                                             AH                               Non-         Total             Total
                                                                       Government(i)
                                                                                           Government
           Balance, beginning of year                   $    70,973 $        8,442 $           98,486 $ 177,901 $            149,516
           Received or receivable during the year           143,304        279,166             51,072   473,542              429,670
           Used for the acquisition of land                       -              -                  -         -               (3,934)
           Unexpended deferred capital revenue
            returned                                         (1,174)        (2,452)                  -      (3,626)              (73)
           Transferred to expended deferred                                                               (327,575
            capital revenue                                 (92,938)     (186,853)           (47,784)             )      (312,683)
           Transferred to unexpended deferred                                                             (105,058
            operating revenue(ii)                            (9,197)       (95,149)             (712)             )          (83,435)
           Revenue recognized on settlement
            of asset retirement obligations
            (Note 18)                                       (168)            (630)              (314)    (1,112)              (1,160)
           Balance, end of year                         $ 110,800 $          2,524 $          100,748 $ 214,072 $            177,901

                        (i)    The balance for other government all relates to the Province of Alberta (Note 23).
                        (ii)   The transfer is mainly comprised of restricted capital funding of approved expenditures that
                               did not meet the definition of a tangible capital asset.

          (b)    The unexpended deferred capital revenue balance at the end of the year is externally restricted for
                 the following purposes:

                                                                                              2024                    2023
            AH
             Continuing Care Beds                                                      $          4,150     $            12,714
             Information systems                                                                    828                   5,505
             Medical Equipment Replacement Upgrade Program                                        9,771                   2,367
             Diagnostic equipment                                                                 2,436                   3,612
             Alberta Surgical Initiative Capital Program                                         44,229                  15,560
             Rural Health Facilities Revitalization Program                                      31,214                  22,119
             National Association of Pharmacy Regulatory Authorities                             13,687                       -
             Other equipment                                                                      4,485                   9,096
            Total AH                                                                            110,800                  70,973

            Other government
             Facilities and improvements                                                            482                      2,489
             Equipment                                                                            2,042                      5,953
            Total other government                                                                2,524                      8,442

            Donors and non-government
             Equipment                                                                           89,371                  88,792
             Facilities and improvements                                                         11,377                   9,694
            Total donors and non-government                                                     100,748                  98,486
                                                                                       $        214,072     $           177,901




102                                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                          Financial Information



   Note 16      Expended Deferred Revenue

                                                                                 2024                         2023
             Expended deferred capital revenue(a)                          $     8,696,431      $                    8,525,465
             Expended deferred operating revenue(b)                                      -                             116,636
                                                                           $     8,696,431      $                    8,642,101

          (a)    Expended deferred capital revenue

                 Changes in the expended deferred capital revenue balance are as follows:

                                                                                      2024                                     2023
                                                                                        Donors and
                                                                          Other
                                                             AH                            Non-              Total             Total
                                                                       Government(i)
                                                                                        Government
             Balance, beginning of year             $        591,868   $ 7,705,605 $         227,992 $       8,525,465     $ 8,278,969
             Transferred from unexpended deferred
              capital revenue                                 92,938        186,853           47,784          327,575           312,683
             Constructed tangible capital assets on
               behalf of AHS                                       -        198,774                   -       198,774           262,429
             Contributed tangible capital assets
                                                                   -              -                  24              24                35
             Recognized as revenue
                                                           (106,297)      (214,858)          (34,252)        (355,407)         (328,651)
             Balance, end of year
                                                         $ 578,509     $ 7,876,374 $         241,548 $ 8,696,431 $ 8,525,465

                 (i)      The balance includes $228 (2023 - $nil) of expended deferred capital revenue received from
                            government entities outside of the Province of Alberta. The remaining balance in other
                            government relates to the Province of Alberta (Note 23).

          (b)    Expended deferred operating revenue

                 Changes in the expended deferred operating revenue balance are as follows:

                                                                                             2024                     2023
                                                                                             Total                   Total
                  Balance, beginning of year                                       $             116,636 $                  336,972
                  Transferred from unexpended deferred operating revenue                               -                     69,517
                  Recognized as unrestricted revenue                                            (10,195)                          -
                  Recognized as restricted revenue                                             (106,441)                  (289,853)
                  Balance, end of year                                             $                   - $                  116,636

                       The balance of expended deferred operating revenue in 2023 pertains to unused COVID-19 supplies
                       purchased with AH funding.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                              103
Financial Information



      Note 17     Debt

                                                                                2024                       2023
                  Debentures (a):
                    Parkade loan #1                                    $               9,811     $                 13,446
                    Parkade loan #2                                                   11,658                       14,677
                    Parkade loan #3                                                   19,081                       22,372
                    Parkade loan #4                                                   88,956                       98,549
                    Parkade loan #5                                                   22,331                       24,473
                    Parkade loan #6                                                   17,279                       18,411
                    Parkade loan #7                                                   38,774                       41,037
                    Parkade loan #8                                                  149,397                      151,400
                    Parkade loan #9                                                   20,000                            -
                    Energy savings initiative loan                                    14,887                       16,817
                    EMS support vehicle loan                                          23,639                       32,906
                                                                       $             415,813     $                434,088

            (a)    Alberta Treasury Board and Finance (TBF) is responsible for the administration of the Province’s
                   lending program.

                   AHS issued debentures to TBF, a related party, to finance the construction of parkades. AHS has
                   pledged revenue derived directly or indirectly from the operations of all parking facilities being
                   constructed, renovated, owned, and operated by AHS as security for these debentures.

                   AHS issued a debenture to TBF relating to an energy savings initiative. AHS has pledged the mortgage
                   on the Royal Alexandra Hospital Lands and Alberta Hospital Lands as security for this debenture.

                   AHS issued a debenture to TBF relating to EMS support vehicles. AHS has pledged the vehicles as
                   security for this debenture.

                   AHS is in compliance with all performance requirements relating to its debentures as at March 31,
                   2024.

                   The maturity dates and interest rates for the outstanding debentures are as follows:

                                                                          Maturity Date              Fixed Interest Rate
                  Parkade loan #1                                      September 2026                     4.4025%
                  Parkade loan #2                                      September 2027                     4.3870%
                  Parkade loan #3                                      March 2029                         4.9150%
                  Parkade loan #4                                      September 2031                     4.9250%
                  Parkade loan #5                                      June 2032                          4.2280%
                  Parkade loan #6                                      December 2035                      3.6090%
                  Parkade loan #7                                      March 2038                         2.6400%
                  Parkade loan #8                                      December 2059                      3.6010%
                  Parkade loan #9                                      March 2044                         5.1200%
                  Energy savings initiative loan                       December 2030                      2.4160%
                  EMS support vehicle loan                             September 2026                     1.1500%

            (b)    As at March 31, 2024, AHS has access to a $220,000 (2023 – $220,000) revolving demand facility
                   with a Canadian chartered bank which may be used for operating purposes. Draws on the facility bear
                   interest at the bank’s prime rate less 0.50% per annum. As at March 31, 2024, AHS has $nil (2023 –
                   $nil) drawn against this facility.

                   AHS also has access to a $33,000 (2023 – $33,000) revolving demand letter of credit facility which
                   may be used to secure AHS’ obligations to third parties. At March 31, 2024, AHS has $3,316 (2023 –
                   $3,353) in a letter of credit outstanding against this facility. AHS is in compliance with the terms of the
                   agreement relating to the letter of credit as at March 31, 2024.




104                                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                        Financial Information



   Note 17      Debt (continued)

          (c)    AHS is committed to making principal and interest payments with respect to its outstanding debt as
                 follows:

                     Year Ended March 31               Principal                 Interest                    Total
                              2025                   $       40,226 $                   15,535      $              55,761
                              2026                           41,671                     14,090                     55,761
                              2027                           36,274                     12,584                     48,858
                              2028                           28,904                     11,236                     40,140
                              2029                           28,302                     10,023                     38,325
                            Thereafter                     240,436                     108,280                    348,716
                                                     $     415,813 $                   171,748      $             587,561

                 During the year, the total interest related to debt was $15,788 (2023 – $16,960), comprised of
                 capitalized interest of $nil (2023 – $3,631) (Note 19(a)) and interest expense of $15,788 (2023 –
                 $13,329). Accrued interest at March 31, 2024 amounted to $2,679 (2023 – $2,767).


   Note 18      Asset Retirement Obligations

                                                                                      2024                    2023
                 Asset retirement obligations, beginning of year             $           583,172        $        544,416
                 Liability incurred                                                             -                   1,144
                 Liability settled                                                        (1,978)                 (2,780)
                 Revision in estimates (Note 19)                                         (41,773)                 40,392
                 Asset retirement obligations, end of year                   $           539,421        $        583,172
                AHS has asset retirement obligations to remove hazardous asbestos fibre containing materials from its
                buildings. Regulations require AHS to handle and dispose of the asbestos in a prescribed manner when
                it is disturbed, such as when the building undergoes renovations or is demolished. Although timing of
                the asbestos removal is conditional on the building undergoing renovations or being demolished,
                regulations create an existing obligation for AHS to remove the asbestos when asset retirement
                activities occur.

                The estimate of the liability is based primarily on asbestos abatement rates calculated using the current
                costs incurred as part of AHS renovation and demolition projects. Third party engineering reports,
                building schematics, and professional judgments were used in determining the square meters
                containing asbestos. A funding source for this obligation has not been determined.

                The timing of settlement of asset retirement obligations is currently unknown. For the year ended March
                31, 2024, a recovery of $1,112 (2023 - $1,160) was recognized (Note 15(a)).




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                         105
Financial Information



      Note 19   Tangible Capital Assets


                                                                             Transfers/        Disposals/
                           Cost                2023          Additions(a)                                             2024
                                                                            Adjustments(i)    Write-downs

            Facilities and improvements   $   12,717,651 $             - $        267,024 $           (1,222) $       12,983,453
            Work in progress                     665,094         506,115        (509,307)               (411)            661,491
            Equipment                          2,974,510         207,650           (2,001)           (40,277)          3,139,882
            Information systems                2,268,704          14,038          108,723             (7,067)          2,384,398
            Building service equipment         1,025,874               -           64,883                (13)          1,090,744
            Land(b)                              121,749              32                 -                  -            121,781
            Leased facilities and
             improvements                        317,743          33,000           22,431                   -            373,174
            Land improvements                    107,568               -            6,474                   -            114,042
                                          $   20,198,893 $       760,835 $       (41,773) $          (48,990) $       20,868,965


                                               2023         Amortization Effect of Transfers/ Disposals/
            Accumulated Amortization                                                                                   2024
                                                             Expense        Adjustments       Write-downs

            Facilities and improvements   $    4,994,290 $       158,195 $                     - $       (1,120) $     5,151,365
            Work in progress                           -               -                       -               -               -
            Equipment                          2,298,163         172,250                       -        (38,919)       2,431,494
            Information systems                1,682,243         150,060                       -         (6,994)       1,825,309
            Building service equipment           626,105          49,801                       -            (14)         675,892
            Land(b)                                    -               -                       -               -               -
            Leased facilities and
             improvements                        214,316          19,714                       -               -      234,030
            Land improvements                     80,127           3,093                       -               -       83,220
                                          $    9,895,244 $       553,113 $                     - $      (47,047) $ 10,401,310


                                                                             Transfers/        Disposals/
                           Cost                2022          Additions                                                2023
                                                                            Adjustments       Write-downs

            Facilities and improvements   $   11,129,930 $           772 $   1,604,903 $             (17,954) $       12,717,651
            Work in progress                   1,934,048         557,785   (1,822,697)                (4,042)            665,094
            Equipment                          2,823,434         208,700        (2,107)              (55,517)          2,974,510
            Information systems                2,106,767          10,124       165,939               (14,126)          2,268,704
            Building service equipment           978,574               -        47,300                      -          1,025,874
            Land(b)                              117,804           3,966              -                  (21)            121,749
            Leased facilities and
             improvements                        262,878               -          55,496                (631)            317,743
            Land improvements                    116,010               -          (8,442)                   -            107,568
                                          $   19,469,445 $       781,347 $        40,392 $           (92,291) $       20,198,893


                                                        Amortization Effect of Transfers/ Disposals/
            Accumulated Amortization          2022                                                                    2023
                                                         Expense        Adjustments       Write-downs

           Facilities and improvements    $   4,866,614 $      142,844 $                      - $     (15,168) $       4,994,290
           Work in progress                           -              -                        -              -                 -
           Equipment                          2,190,700        160,272                        -       (52,809)         2,298,163
           Information systems                1,556,079        140,274                        -       (14,110)         1,682,243
           Building service equipment           574,139         51,966                        -              -           626,105
           Land(b)                                    -              -                        -              -                 -
           Leased facilities and
            improvements                        205,500          9,123                        -          (307)           214,316
           Land improvements                     78,378          1,749                        -              -            80,127
                                          $   9,471,410 $      506,228 $                      - $     (82,394)    $    9,895,244

                     (i)    Transfers and adjustments relate to reclassifications between capital asset
                            categories and revisions to asset retirement costs of $41,773 (2023 - $40,392)
                            (Note 18).




106                                                                                            Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                    Financial Information



   Note 19     Tangible Capital Assets (continued)

                                                                              Net Book Value
                                                                     2024                             2023
           Facilities and improvements                $                       7,832,088 $                     7,723,361
           Work in progress                                                     661,491                         665,094
           Equipment                                                            708,388                         676,347
           Information systems                                                  559,089                         586,461
           Building service equipment                                           414,852                         399,769
           Land(b)                                                              121,781                         121,749
           Leased facilities and improvements                                   139,144                         103,427
           Land improvements                                                     30,822                          27,441
                                                      $                      10,467,655 $                    10,303,649

         (a)   Additions

               Additions include tangible capital assets constructed by AI on behalf of AHS of $198,774 (2023 –
               $262,429) (Note 23) and $24 (2023 – $35) contributed from other sources. During the year, AHS
               capitalized interest of $nil (2023 – $3,631) (Note 17(c)) within work in progress. Capital lease additions
               amounted to $37,753 (2023 – $19,031).

         (b)   Leased Land

               Land at the following sites have been leased to AHS at nominal values:

                                 Site                                   Leased from                 Lease Expiry
          Evansburg Community Health Centre                      Yellowhead County             April 2031
          Bethany Care Centre                                    Red Deer College              April 2034
          Myrnam Land                                            Eagle Hill Foundation         May 2038
          Helipad Land at Two Hills                              Stella Stefiuk                August 2041
          McConnell Place North                                  City of Edmonton              September 2044
          Northeast Community Health Centre                      City of Edmonton              February 2047
          Jasper Healthcare Centre                               Parks Canada                  March 2049
          Foothills Medical Centre Parkade                       University of Calgary         July 2054
          Alberta Children’s Hospital                            University of Calgary         December 2103
          Kaye Edmonton Clinic (Parcel H)                        The University of Alberta     February 2109
          Laneway adjacent to Queen Elizabeth II Hospital        City of Grande Prairie        Under negotiation

         (c)   Leased Tangible Capital Assets

               Tangible capital assets acquired through capital leases includes vehicle leases, equipment, information
               systems and facilities with a cost of $579,537 (2023 – $487,324) and accumulated amortization of
               $286,709 (2023 – $269,475).

         (d)   Asset Retirement Costs

               Facilities and improvements and Building service equipment, include $538,304 (2023 - $581,299) of
               asset retirement costs and $359,135 (2023 - $348,944) of related accumulated amortization.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                     107
Financial Information



      Note 20     Inventories of Supplies

                                                                                     2024                        2023
                    Pharmaceuticals                                     $                   106,759 $                   114,334
                    Medical and surgical supplies                                            47,395                      95,817
                    Other(i)                                                                 43,015                      97,574
                                                                        $                   197,169 $                   307,725

                        (i)   Other is mainly related to staff wearing apparel such as gowns and masks, housekeeping, and
                              other supplies not included under pharmaceuticals and medical and surgical supplies.

                  Demand has reduced for inventories purchased to support public health emergencies in prior years,
                  resulting in a valuation adjustment of $78,997 (2023 – $71,419) in the current year.

                  AHS holds and distributes COVID-19 rapid test kits, provided at no cost by the Federal Government,
                  on behalf of AH. These inventories are excluded from these consolidated financial statements. AHS is
                  holding $1,459 (2023 – $223,542) on behalf of AH as at March 31, 2024.



      Note 21     Accumulated Surplus

      Accumulated surplus is comprised of the following:

                                                                      2024                                                 2023

                                                                                     Internally
                                                 Invested in                         Restricted
                                 Unrestricted     Tangible                          Surplus for
                                                               Endowments(b)                             Total             Total
                                   Surplus         Capital                       Insurance Equity
                                                  Assets (a)                     Requirements and
                                                                                   Foundations(c)


      Balance, beginning of
        year                     $   262,491 $      649,167 $        77,492 $           131,677 $        1,120,827 $ 1,037,157
      Annual operating
         surplus                     183,631               -                 -                    -        183,631           83,670
      Net investment in
         tangible capital
         assets                      (56,615)        56,615                  -                    -                -               -
      Transfer of insurance
         equity requirements
         and foundations
         deficits                      8,182               -                 -              (8,182)                -               -
      Transfer of net deficits
        related to asset
        retirement
        obligations                    9,435         (9,435)                 -                    -                -               -
      Transfer of
        endowment
        contributions
        (Note 5)                     (27,781)             -         27,781                     -                 -           -
      Balance, end of year       $   379,343 $      696,347 $      105,273 $            123,495 $       1,304,458 $ 1,120,827




108                                                                                            Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                   Financial Information



Note 21 Accumulated Surplus (continued)

     (a)     Invested in Tangible Capital Assets

             Invested in tangible capital assets represents the portion of accumulated surpluses that has been invested
             in the acquisition or construction of AHS’ assets. The balance is offset by asset retirement costs
             recognized to date in accumulated surplus net of related liability settlements.

             Reconciliation of invested in tangible capital assets:

                                                                                         2024                2023
           Tangible capital assets (Note 19)                                        $    10,467,655     $   10,303,649

            Net Book Value of Asset Retirement Costs capitalized (Note 19(d))              (179,169)          (232,355)

            Less funded by:
              Expended deferred capital revenue (Note 16(a))                             (8,696,431)      (8,525,465)
              Debt (Note 17)                                                               (415,813)        (434,088)
              Unexpended debt                                                                 32,405           20,999
              Obligations under capital leases (Note 12)                                   (142,882)        (122,977)
              Life lease deposits (Note 12)                                                   (9,166)          (9,779)
                                                                                    $     1,056,599     $     999,984
           Asset retirement costs recognized net of related liability settlements         (360,252)         (350,817)
                                                                                    $       696,347     $     649,167


     (b)     Endowments

             Endowments represent the portion of accumulated surplus that is restricted and must be maintained in
             perpetuity. Transfers of endowment contributions from unrestricted surplus include $27,781 (2023 – $110)
             of net contributions received in the year (Note 5).

     (c)     Internally Restricted Surplus for Insurance Equity Requirements and Foundations

             Insurance equity requirements comprise surpluses of $21,042 (2023 – $39,359) related to equity of the
             LPIP mainly relating to legislative requirements per the Insurance Act. Foundations comprise surpluses
             amounting to $102,453 (2023 – $92,318) related to donations received by AHS’ Controlled Foundations
             without external restrictions attached.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                    109
Financial Information



      Note 22    Contractual Obligations and Contingent Liabilities

          (a)    Contractual Obligations

                Contractual obligations are AHS’ obligations to others that will become liabilities in the future when the
                terms of those contracts or agreements are met.

                The estimated aggregate amount payable for the unexpired terms of these contractual obligations are as
                follows:

                  Year ended                                                  Operating        Capital
                                           Services(i)         Other(ii)                                          Total
                   March 31                                                    Lease           Projects
                      2025             $  3,533,626        $     440,411     $Payments
                                                                                  67,744      $ 315,700      $    4,357,481
                      2026                1,890,785              275,754          56,726          63,945          2,287,210
                      2027                1,360,101              188,217          51,335          16,016          1,615,669
                      2028                1,138,489              113,045          44,196          17,268          1,312,998
                      2029                  985,707               31,911          33,754          21,905          1,073,277
                   Thereafter             7,147,609               21,696         119,086          13,644          7,302,035
                 March 31, 2024        $ 16,056,317        $   1,071,034     $ 372,841        $ 448,478      $   17,948,670

                 March 31, 2023        $ 20,121,744        $   1,126,267     $   312,835      $ 268,567      $   21,829,413

                      (i)    Service obligations mainly relate to contracts with third parties for the provision of long-term
                             care services, home care services, and community laboratory services (Note 22(b)).
                      (ii)   Other obligations mainly relate to contracts with third parties for maintenance, information
                             technology services, software, equipment, and procurement of medical supplies and food.

          (b)    Transition of Community Laboratory Services

                On December 5, 2022, community laboratory services were transferred from AHS to DynaLIFEDX
                (DLDX). The agreement included an estimated commitment of $4.8 billion over an initial term of 14 years
                and four months. On August 18, 2023, the government announced that AHS, through Alberta Precision
                Laboratories, would be the sole provider of community laboratory services in Alberta, to improve service
                delivery to Albertans (Note 27). The previous agreements with DLDX, including the related commitment,
                was cancelled effective August 31, 2023.

          (c)    Contingent Liabilities

                     (i)     Legal Claims

                             AHS is subject to legal claims during its normal course of business. AHS recognizes a liability
                             when the assessment of a claim indicates that a future event is likely to confirm that a liability
                             has been incurred at the date of the financial statements and the amount of the contingent loss
                             can be reasonably estimated.

                             Accruals have been made in specific instances where it is likely that losses will be incurred
                             based on a reasonable estimate. As at March 31, 2024, accruals have been recorded as part
                             of the provision for unpaid claims and other liabilities (Note 12). Included in this accrual are
                             claims in which AHS has been jointly named with the Minister. The accrual provided for these
                             claims under the provision for unpaid claims represents AHS’ portion of the liability.




110                                                                                            Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                    Financial Information



   Note 22    Contractual Obligations and Contingent Liabilities (continued)

                         AHS has been named in 234 legal claims (2023 – 292 claims) related to conditions in existence
                         at March 31, 2024 where the likelihood of the occurrence of a future event confirming a
                         contingent loss is not determinable. Of these, 201 claims have $706,650 in specified amounts
                         and 33 have no specified amounts (2023 – 256 claims with $777,051 of specified claims and
                         36 claims with no specified amounts). The resolution of indeterminable claims may result in a
                         liability, if any, that is different than the claimed amount.

                  (ii)   Collective Agreements

                         AHS currently has 1 (2023 – 7) collective agreement that has expired as at March 31, 2024.
                         Given that negotiations are ongoing or have not commenced, no additional disclosures have
                         been made.

   Note 23    Related Parties

         Transactions with related parties are included within these consolidated financial statements, unless
         otherwise stated.

         The Minister appoints all members of the AHS Board. The viability of AHS’ operations depends on transfers
         from AH. Transactions between AHS and AH are reported and disclosed in the Consolidated Statement of
         Operations, the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, and the Notes to the Consolidated Financial
         Statements, and are therefore excluded from the tables below.

         Related parties also include key management personnel of AHS. AHS has defined key management
         personnel to include those disclosed in Schedules 2A and 2B of these consolidated financial statements,
         except management reporting to CEO direct reports. Related party transactions with key management
         personnel primarily consist of compensation related payments and are undertaken on similar terms and
         conditions to those adopted if the entities were dealing at arm’s length.

         AHS is a related party with respect to those entities consolidated or included on a modified equity basis in
         the consolidated financial statements of the Province of Alberta. Entities consolidated or included on a
         modified equity basis have been grouped with their respective ministry and transactions between AHS and
         the other ministries are recorded at their exchange amount as follows:

                                                           Revenues(a)                         Expenses

                                                    2024                 2023           2024                2023

          Alberta Advanced Education(b)        $      57,875     $        59,994   $     184,077      $       181,312
          Alberta Infrastructure(c)                  312,158             289,460          12,064               17,310
          Alberta Mental Health and
                                                     121,779              90,695                -                    -
          Addiction(d)
          Other ministries(e)                         33,157              29,113          31,749               33,112
          Total for the year                   $     524,969     $       469,262   $     227,890      $       231,734

                                                       Receivable from                         Payable to

                                                    2024                 2023           2024
                                                                                                            2023

          Alberta Advanced Education(b)        $      11,435     $         7,597   $      33,399      $        45,006
          Alberta Infrastructure(c)                   69,725              67,236           6,144                1,000
          Alberta Mental Health and
                                                      28,419              22,641           1,288                     -
          Addiction(d)
          Other ministries(e)                          8,928               3,635         419,112              437,593
          Balance, end of year                 $     118,507     $       101,109   $     459,943      $       483,599




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                     111
Financial Information



      Note 23   Related Parties (continued)

                   (a)   Revenues with Province of Alberta ministries include other government transfers of $492,963
                         (2023 – $433,722), (Note 4), other income of $29,791 (2023 – $31,307) (Note 6), and fees
                         and charges of $2,214 (2023 – $4,233).

                   (b)   The majority of AHS’ transactions with Alberta Advanced Education relate to initiatives with
                         the University of Alberta and the University of Calgary. These initiatives include teaching,
                         research, and program delivery. A number of physicians are employed by either AHS or the
                         universities but perform services for both. Due to proximity of locations, some initiatives result
                         in sharing physical space and support services. The transactions reported are a result of
                         funding provided from one to the other and recoveries of shared costs.

                   (c)   The transactions with AI relate to the construction of tangible capital assets on behalf of AHS.
                         These transactions include operating transfers of $98,110 (2023 – $99,542) and recognition
                         of expended deferred capital revenue of $214,048 (2023 – $189,918) relating to tangible
                         capital assets with stipulations or external restrictions to utilize over their remaining useful
                         lives. Not included in the table above but included in total amounts disclosed in Note 19(a) is
                         tangible capital assets constructed by AI on behalf of AHS of $198,774 (2023 – $262,429).

                   (d)   The transactions with Alberta Mental Health and Addiction relate to initiatives to support
                         Albertans experiencing addiction and mental health challenges.

                   (e)   The payable transactions with other ministries include the debt payable to TBF (Note 17(a)).

                At March 31, 2024, AHS has recorded deferred revenue from other ministries within the Province of
                Alberta, excluding AH, of $109,380 (2023 – $96,218) related to unexpended deferred operating revenue
                (Note 14(a)), $2,524 (2023 – $8,442) related to unexpended deferred capital revenue (Note 15(a)) and
                $7,876,146 (2023 – $7,705,605) related to expended deferred capital revenue (Note 16(a)).

                Contingent liabilities in which AHS has been jointly named with other government entities within the
                Province of Alberta are disclosed in Note 22.

      Note 24   Government Partnerships

                AHS has proportionately consolidated 50% of the results of the PCNs and NACTRC and 33.33% of the
                results in iRSM. The following is 100% of the financial position and results of operations for AHS’
                government partnerships.

                                                                                            2024               2023
                 Financial assets (portfolio investments, accounts receivable,
                   other assets)                                                     $         83,417     $       67,995
                 Liabilities (trade accounts payable, unexpended deferred
                   operating revenue)                                                          83,417             67,995
                 Accumulated surplus                                                 $              -     $            -

                 Total revenues                                                      $        279,160     $      263,082
                 Total expenses                                                               279,160            263,082
                 Annual surplus                                                      $              -     $            -




112                                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                            Financial Information



   Note 25    Trusts under Administration

      (a)     Health Benefit Trust of Alberta (HBTA)

             AHS is one of more than 30 participants in the HBTA and has a majority representation on the HBTA governance board.
             The HBTA is a formal employee life and health trust established under a Trust Agreement effective January 1, 2000. The
             HBTA provides health and other related employee benefits pursuant to the authorizing Trust Agreement.

             The HBTA’s balances as at March 31 are as follows:

                                                                           2024                               2023
               Financial assets                                $                   232,932      $                       125,630
               Liabilities                                                          23,983                               34,644
               Net financial assets                                                208,949                               90,986
               Non-financial assets                                                      -                                    5
               Net assets                                      $                   208,949      $                        90,991

             AHS has included in prepaid expenses $142,539 (2023 – $59,712) representing in substance a prepayment of future
             premiums to the HBTA. For the fiscal year ended March 31, 2024, AHS paid premiums of $632,746 (2023 – $552,232)
             which is approximately 98% (2023 – 98%) of the total premiums received by the HBTA.

      (b)     Other Trust Funds

             AHS holds funds in trust for research and development, education, and other programs. These amounts are held and
             administered on behalf of others in accordance with the terms and conditions embodied in the relevant agreements
             with no unilateral power to appropriate the funds or to change the conditions set out in the trust indenture (or
             agreement) and therefore are not reported in these consolidated financial statements. As at March 31, 2024, the
             balance of funds held in trust by AHS for research and development is $100 (2023 – $100).

             AHS holds funds in trust from continuing care residents for personal expenses. As at March 31, 2024, the balance of
             these funds is $2,185 (2023 – $1,855). These amounts are not included in the consolidated financial statements.

             AHS and a third party trustee administer the SERP in accordance with a retirement compensation arrangement trust
             agreement. As at March 31, 2024, there are $25,176 in plan assets (2023 – $26,547). These amounts are not included
             in the consolidated financial statements.

   Note 26    Segment Disclosure

              The Consolidated Schedule of Segment Disclosures – Schedule 3 is intended to enable users to better understand
              the reporting entity and identify the resources allocated to the major activities of AHS.

              AHS’ revenues, as reported on the Consolidated Statement of Operations, are most informatively presented by
              source and are not reasonably assignable to the reportable segments. For each reported segment, the expenses
              are directly or reasonably attributable to the segment.

              The segments have been selected based on the presentation that is adopted for the financial reporting, planning and
              budget processes, and represent the major distinguishable activities of AHS.

              Segments include:

             (a) Continuing care

                  Continuing care is comprised of long-term care including chronic, palliative, and psychiatric care in facilities
                  operated by AHS and contracted providers.


             (b) Community care

                  Community care includes supportive living, palliative and hospice care, and community programs including
                  Primary Care Networks, Family Care Clinics, urgent care centres, community paramedic program and mental
                  health. This segment excludes community-based dialysis, oncology, and surgical services.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                                113
Financial Information



      Note 26     Segment Disclosure (continued)

                (c)   Home care

                      Home care is comprised of home nursing and support.

                (d)   Acute care

                      Acute care is comprised predominantly of patient care units such as medical, surgical, intensive
                      care, palliative care, obstetrics, pediatrics, mental health, emergency, day/night care, clinics, day
                      surgery, and contracted surgical services. This segment also includes operating and recovery
                      rooms.

                (e)   Emergency medical services

                      Emergency medical services is comprised of ground ambulance, air ambulance, patient transport,
                      and central dispatch. AHS also supports community paramedic programs, as well as other programs
                      that support the learning, development, quality and safety of emergency medical services
                      professionals.

                (f)   Diagnostic and therapeutic services

                      Diagnostic and therapeutic services support and provide care for patients through clinical lab (both
                      in the community and acute settings), diagnostic imaging, pharmacy, rehabilitation services such as
                      physiotherapy, occupational therapy, respiratory therapy, and speech language pathology.

                (g)   Population and public health

                      Population and public health is comprised primarily of health promotion, disease and injury
                      prevention, and health protection. This segment also includes immunizations, traveler’s health
                      clinics, outbreaks, screening programs, and disease surveillance. This segment excludes activities
                      associated with treatment of communicable diseases.

                (h)   Research and education

                      Research and education is comprised primarily of costs pertaining to formally organized health
                      research and graduate medical education, primarily funded by donations, and third party
                      contributions.

                (i)   Information technology

                      Information technology is comprised of costs pertaining to the provision of service and consultation
                      in the design, development, implementation of technology services and systems.

                (j)   Support services

                      Support services is comprised of building maintenance operations (including utilities), materials
                      management (including purchasing, central warehousing, distribution, and sterilization),
                      housekeeping, patient registration, health records, infection control, food services, and emergency
                      preparedness.

                (k)   Administration

                      Administration is comprised of human resources, finance, communications, and general
                      administration, as well as a share of administration of certain contracted health service providers.
                      General administration includes senior executives and many functions such as planning and
                      development, quality assurance, patient safety, insurance, privacy, public relations, risk
                      management, internal audit, and legal.




114                                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                    Financial Information



   Note 27    Acquisition of DynaLIFEDX

              On August 18, 2023, the government announced that AHS, through Alberta Precision Laboratories,
              would be the sole provider of community laboratory services in Alberta, to improve service delivery to
              Albertans. This was accomplished by AHS’ acquisition of the operations, including specific assets,
              liabilities, and workforce of DynaLIFEDX (DLDX) through the Asset Purchase and Transition
              Agreements executed on August 31, 2023. The previous Services Agreement and Ancillary
              Agreements with DLDX including the related commitment, was cancelled effective August 31, 2023
              (Note 22(b)).

              The purchase price allocation of assets and liabilities on the basis of fair value was as follows:


                                                                                                 August 31, 2023
                   Financial assets:
                    Cash                                                                  $                    2,112
                    Accounts receivable                                                                        7,173
                                                                                                               9,285

                   Liabilities:
                    Accounts payable and accrued liabilities                                                  39,468
                    Employee future benefits                                                                  10,421
                                                                                                              49,889

                   Non-financial assets:
                    Tangible capital assets                                                                   71,760
                    Inventories of supplies                                                                    7,886
                    Prepaid expenses                                                                           4,959
                                                                                                              84,605

                   Purchase price before settlement of balances due from DLDX                               (47,795)
                   Net balances due from DLDX settled at acquisition                                          16,295
                   Cash purchase consideration paid                                                         (31,500)
                   Purchase premium before transaction costs                                                 (3,794)
                   Transaction costs                                                                           (912)
                   Purchase premium                                                       $                  (4,706)



   Note 28    Corresponding Amounts

              Certain corresponding amounts have been reclassified to conform with 2024 presentation.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                       115
Financial Information



      Note 29   Subsequent Events and Restructuring/Refocusing of AHS

                On November 8, 2023, the Premier of Alberta announced that AHS will shift its primary focus from being
                the regional health authority in Alberta to focusing on acute care. Implementation of these changes will
                be introduced in a staged approach, resulting in the restructuring of AHS and the creation of four new
                agencies focusing on primary care, acute care, continuing care, and mental health and addiction.

                On April 2, 2024, the Premier of Alberta announced that Recovery Alberta will be the new provincial
                health agency responsible for the delivery and oversight of mental health and addiction services. The
                annual budget for these services is estimated at approximately $1 billion and is expected to be
                transitioned from Alberta Health to the ministry of Mental Health and Addiction.

                On May 30, 2024, the Health Statutes Amendment Act, 2024, received Royal Assent, enabling the
                transition from one regional health authority, AHS, to an integrated system of four sector-based provincial
                health agencies. The Regional Health Authorities Act, now renamed the Provincial Health Agencies Act,
                clarifies the Minister of Health’s authority, the roles and responsibilities of the provincial health agencies,
                and enables the transfer of staff from AHS to the new agencies.

                Recovery Alberta will begin operating in the summer of 2024, while the remaining three provincial health
                agencies are expected to be established in the fall of 2024. The full financial effect of the restructuring,
                including the impact on AHS’ assets, liabilities and operations is currently unknown.


      Note 30   Approval of Consolidated Financial Statements

                The consolidated financial statements were approved by the AHS Board on June 3, 2024 and submitted to
                the Ministry of Health.




116                                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                 Financial Information




Schedule 1 – Consolidated Schedule of Expenses by Object
Year ended March 31
(in thousands)
                                                                          2024                            2023
                                                              Budget                 Actual              Actual
                                                              (Note 3)

 Salaries and benefits                                 $         9,408,967     $       9,839,465     $    9,155,665
 Contracts with health service providers                         3,790,600             3,466,333          3,328,374
 Contracts under the Health Facilities Act                          59,300                55,824             28,587
 Drugs and gases(i)                                                827,300               738,881            679,210
 Medical supplies(i)                                               707,000               815,353            828,438
 Other contracted services                                       1,559,300             1,688,175          1,533,975
 Other(a)                                                        1,590,500             1,685,083          1,595,887
 Amortization and loss on disposals/write-downs of
  tangible capital assets (Note 19)                                527,500               555,033          514,897
                                                       $        18,470,467     $      18,844,147     $ 17,665,033

 (a) Significant amounts included in Other are:
   Equipment expense                                   $           320,900     $         295,346     $      272,979
   Utilities                                                       180,400               230,705            209,283
   Building and ground expenses                                    163,300               174,780            164,886
   Housekeeping, laundry and linen, staff wearing                  159,300               163,538            222,813
      apparel, plant maintenance and biomedical
      engineering supplies(i) (ii)
   Building rent                                                   133,500               125,766            128,547
   Minor equipment purchases                                        75,000               103,351             75,540
   Food and dietary supplies                                        88,800                86,029             86,604
   Fundraising and grants awarded                                   52,000                65,734             56,600
   Office supplies and courier                                      54,400                64,347             68,685
   Insurance and liability claims                                   51,500                58,656             35,860
   Travel                                                           30,000                46,165             35,486
   Telecommunications                                               36,400                34,250             30,936
   Licenses, fees and memberships                                   30,630                26,139             27,390
   Education                                                        12,000                14,994             11,802
   Other                                                           202,370               195,283            168,476
                                                       $         1,590,500     $       1,685,083     $    1,595,887

         (i)Demand has reduced for inventories purchased to support public health emergencies in prior years,
         resulting in a valuation adjustment of $78,997 (2023 – $71,419) (Note 20).
         (ii) Includes personal protective equipment, such as procedural masks, N95s, gowns, face shields and

         goggles, as well as other supplies such as hand sanitizers, disinfecting wipes and other cleaning supplies




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                      117
Financial Information




Schedule 2 – Schedules of Remuneration and Benefits
Schedule 2A – Board Remuneration
Year ended March 31, 2024
(in thousands)
                                                                                                                    2024                2023
                                                       Term                    2024 Committees                   Remuneration        Remuneration
 Board Chair(f)
 Dr. Lyle Oberg                               Since Nov 8, 2023           FARC, FC, GCHRC                    $               155     $               -

 Board Members
 Sandy Edmonstone (Vice Chair)                Since Nov 8, 2023           FC (Chair), GCHRC                                    14                    -
 Cynthia Farmer (g)                           Since Nov 8, 2023           -                                                     -                    -
 Angela Fong                                  Since Nov 21, 2023          GCHRC (Chair)                                        12                    -
 Paul George Haggis                           Since Nov 8, 2023           FARC (Chair), FC                                     14                    -
 Evan Romanow(g)                              Since Nov 8, 2023           FC                                                    -                    -
 Andre Tremblay(g)                            Since Nov 8, 2023           FARC, FC, GCHRC                                       -                    -

 Total Board                                                                                                 $               195     $               -

The Board chair and Board members were remunerated with monthly honoraria. In addition, Board members received remuneration for attendance at Board
and committee meetings.

Board committees were established by the Board to assist in governing AHS and overseeing the management of AHS’ business and affairs.

Committee legend: FARC = Finance, Audit and Risk Committee, FC = Foundations Committee, GCHRC = Governance, Compliance and Human
Resources Committee




Schedule 2B – Former Official Administrator/Former Official Administrator
              Committee Remuneration
                                                                                                                    2024                2023
                                                       Term                       2024 Committees                Remuneration        Remuneration

 Former Official Administrator
 Dr. John Cowell                      Nov 17, 2022 to Nov 8, 2023              OAAC                         $                436    $            267

 Former Official Administrator Committee Participants(h)
 Tara Lockyer                   Nov 24, 2022 to Nov 8, 2023                    OAAC                                             2                   4
 Gregory Turnbull               Nov 24, 2022 to Nov 8, 2023                    OAAC                                             3                   4
 Tyler White                    Jul 12, 2023 to Nov 8, 2023                    OAAC                                             1                   -
 Gord Winkel                    Nov 24, 2022 to Nov 8, 2023                    OAAC                                             3                   4

 Total Former Official Administrator / Former Official Administrator Committee                              $                445    $            279

The tenure of the Official Administrator was in lieu of a Board at AHS.

Dr. John Cowell was appointed to the position of Official Administrator effective November 17, 2022 per Ministerial Order 319/2022 for a six month term.
The incumbent was reappointed to the position of Official Administrator effective May 17, 2023 as per Ministerial Order 305/2023 with a term to end on
June 30, 2023, and then subsequently reappointed effective July 1, 2023 as per Ministerial Order 307/2023 with a term to end on December 31, 2023.
The incumbent’s term ended November 8, 2023 when Ministerial Order 307/2023 was repealed by Ministerial Order 314/2023.

Official Administrator committees were established by the Official Administrator to aid in governing AHS and overseeing the management of AHS’
business and affairs. Official Administrator committee participants were eligible to receive honoraria for meetings attended.

Committee legend: OAAC = Official Administrator Advisory Committee




118                                                                                                              Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                                Financial Information



Schedule 2C – Former Board Remuneration
Year ended March 31, 2023
(in thousands)


                                                                                                     2023
                                                                      Term                        Remuneration

               Former Board Chair
               Gregory Turnbull                            Dec 8, 2021 to Nov 17, 2022     $                         43

               Former Board Members
               Dr. Sayeh Zielke (Vice Chair)               Sep 28, 2020 to Nov 17, 2022                              31
               Deborah Apps                                Jan 19, 2021 to Oct 7, 2022                               18
               Tony Dagnone                                Jan 19, 2021 to Nov 17, 2022                              21
               Sherri Fountain                             Jan 19, 2021 to Nov 17, 2022                              23
               Hartley Harris                              Aug 9, 2021 to Nov 17, 2022                               21
               Tara Lockyer                                Aug 17, 2022 to Nov 17, 2022                               7
               Jack Mintz                                  Jun 3, 2021 to Nov 17, 2022                               17
               Heidi Overguard                             Sep 25, 2019 to Nov 17, 2022                              23
               Natalia Reiman                              Jan 19, 2021 to Nov 17, 2022                              18
               Brian Vaasjo                                Aug 20, 2019 to Nov 17, 2022                              19
               Vicki Yellow Old Woman                      Sep 28, 2020 to Nov 17, 2022                              19

               Former Board Committee Participants
               Dr. William Ghali                           Oct 1, 2021 to Nov 17, 2022                                1
               Stephen Livergant                           Apr 9, 2021 to Sep 15, 2022                                -
               Gord Winkel                                 Nov 27, 2015 to Nov 17, 2022                               1

               Total Former Board                                                          $                        262

Former Board members were remunerated with monthly honoraria. In addition, they received remuneration for attendance at Board and committee
meetings. Former Board members did not serve however in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2024, having been dismissed effective November 17,
2022.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                                   119
Financial Information



Schedule 2D – Executive Remuneration and Benefits
Year ended March 31, 2024
(in thousands)
                                                                                                                    2024
                                                                                                              Other Non-
                                                                               Base Salary Other Cash
                   For the Current Fiscal Year                         FTE (a)     (b, i)                       Cash              Subtotal        Severance (e)     Total
                                                                                           Benefits (c)
                                                                                                              Benefits (d)
Board / Former Official Administrator Direct Reports
Athana Mentzelopoulos – President and Chief Executive
 Officer(j, dd)                                                          0.31 $        179 $          - $               88 $             267 $                - $           267
Sean Chilton – Interim President and Chief Executive Officer(k, ee)      0.06           35                -                  6               41               -              41
Mauro Chies – President and Chief Executive Officer(l)                   0.63          374                -             85               459              1,386        1,845
Ronda White – Chief Audit Executive(m, ff)                               1.00          313            2                 73               388                  -             388
Athana Mentzelopoulos – Official Administrator Advisor/
 Provisional Lead, Emergency Medical Services(j, dd)                     0.33          119                -             44               163                  -             163

CEO Direct Reports
Sean Chilton – Interim VP and Chief Operating Officer, Clinical
 Operations/VP, People, Health Professions and Information
 Technology(k, ee)                                                       0.94          410           19                102               531                  -             531
Lori Anderson – Acting VP and Chief Operating Officer, Clinical
 Operations(n)                                                           0.03           10            3                      2               15               -              15
Deb Gordon – VP and Chief Operating Officer, Clinical
 Operations(o, hh)                                                       0.52          212                -                  7           219               970         1,189
Dr. Sid Viner – VP and Medical Director, Clinical Operations(ff)         0.90          436           22                102               560                  -             560
Dr. Peter Jamieson – Interim VP, Quality and Chief Medical
 Officer(p, gg)                                                          0.33          177                -                  -           177                  -             177
Dr. Francois Belanger – VP, Quality and Chief Medical
 Officer(q, hh)                                                          0.63          316                -             85               401              1,071        1,472
Susan McGillivray – Interim VP, People and Health
 Professions(r, ee)                                                      0.60          229                -             61               290                  -             290
Karen Horon – VP, Cancer Care Alberta and Clinical Support
 Services(s, ff)                                                         1.00          331            1                 96               428                  -             428
Natalie McMurtry – Interim VP, Provincial Clinical Excellence(t, ff)     0.81          219                -             48               267                  -             267
Dr. Braden Manns – Interim VP, Provincial Clinical Excellence(u)         0.19          107            2                      7           116                  -             116
Kerry Bales – Chief Program Officer, Addiction and Mental
 Health and Correctional Health Services(ff)                             1.00          328                -             99               427                  -             427
Holly Budd – Acting Senior Program Officer, Community
 Engagement and Communications(v, ff)                                    0.33           60           12                 18                   90               -              90
Gail Fredrickson – Interim VP, Community Engagement and
 Communications(w)                                                       0.07           18            2                      3               23               -              23
Colleen Turner – VP, Community Engagement and
 Communications(x, hh)                                                   0.60          233                -            103               336               792         1,128
Michael Lam – Interim VP, Corporate Services and Chief
 Financial Officer(y, ff)                                                0.33           97           12                 29               138                  -             138
Colleen Purdy – VP, Corporate Services and Chief Financial
 Officer(z, hh)                                                          0.63          273                -             57               330               504              834
Andrea Beckwith-Ferraton – Interim General Counsel and
 Corporate Secretary(aa, ff)                                             0.37           86           10                 23               119                  -             119
Tina Giesbrecht – General Counsel(bb, hh)                                0.63          165            5                 49               219               356              575
Geoffrey Pradella – Chief Strategy Officer(cc)                           0.35          105                -             26               131               144              275


Total Executive                                                         12.59 $      4,832 $         90 $            1,213 $           6,135 $            5,223 $     11,358


Management Reporting to CEO Direct Reports                              59.68 $     14,938 $        468 $            2,844 $          18,250 $             388 $      18,638




120                                                                                                                              Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                                               Financial Information



  Schedule 2D – Executive Remuneration and Benefits (continued)
  Year ended March 31
  (in thousands)
                                                                                                          2023
                                                                                         Other      Other Non-
                                                                           Base                                                    Severance
                  For the Prior Fiscal Year                      FTE (a)        (b, i)   Cash         Cash          Subtotal          (e)           Total
                                                                         Salary
                                                                                       Benefits (c) Benefits (d)
Official Administrator / Former Board Direct Reports
                                                                                                                           64
Mauro Chies – President and Chief Executive Officer                0.99 $        490 $         13 $         143 $           6 $               - $       646
Dr. Verna Yiu – President and Chief Executive Officer              0.01             4            -             4               8            660         668
Ronda White – Chief Audit Executive                                1.00          291             1           45           337                 -         337
Athana Mentzelopoulos – Official Administrator Advisor/
 Provisional Lead, Emergency Medical Services                      0.37          139             -           57           196                 -         196

CEO Direct Reports
Deb Gordon – VP and Chief Operating Officer, Clinical
 Operations                                                        1.00          389             -           51           440                 -         440
Dr. Sid Viner – VP and Medical Director, Clinical Operations       0.90          415           22           110           547                 -         547
Dr. Francois Belanger – VP, Quality and Chief Medical Officer      1.00          477             -           59           536                 -         536
Sean Chilton – VP, People, Health Professions and Information
 Technology                                                        1.00          365             1           81           447                 -         447
Karen Horon – Interim VP, Cancer Care Alberta and Clinical
 Support Services                                                  0.98          255             3           63           321                 -         321
Mauro Chies – VP, Cancer Care Alberta and Clinical Support
 Services                                                          0.01             4            -             1               5              -             5
Dr. Braden Manns – Interim VP, Provincial Clinical Excellence      0.83          454             6           34           494                 -         494
Kathryn Todd – VP, Provincial Clinical Excellence                  0.08           24             5             5           34                 -             34
Dr. Mark Joffe – VP and Medical Director, Cancer Care Alberta,
 Clinical Support Services and Provincial Clinical Excellence      0.62          288           20            29           337                 -         337
Kerry Bales – Chief Program Officer, Addiction and Mental
 Health and Correctional Health Services                           0.79          242             -           57           299                 -         299
Colleen Turner – VP, Community Engagement and
 Communications                                                    1.00          356             -           88           444                 -         444
Colleen Purdy – VP, Corporate Services and Chief Financial
 Officer                                                           1.00          412             3           78           493                 -         493
Tina Giesbrecht – General Counsel                                  1.00          257             3           41           301                 -         301



Total Executive                                                   12.58 $      4,862 $         77 $         946 $       5,885 $             660 $     6,545




Management Reporting to CEO Direct Reports                        56.91 $     13,828 $        459 $       1,608 $      15,895 $             457 $    16,352




  Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                                                    121
  Financial Information



  Schedule 2E – Executive Supplemental Pension Plan and Supplemental
                Executive Retirement Plan
  Year ended March 31
  (in thousands)
  Certain employees will receive retirement benefits that supplement the benefits limited under the registered plans for service. The Supplemental
  Pension Plan (SPP) is a defined contribution plan and the Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan (SERP) is a defined benefit plan. The amounts
  in this table represent the total SPP and SERP benefits earned by the individual during the fiscal year. The current period benefit costs for SPP
  and the other costs for SERP included in other non-cash benefits disclosed in Schedule 2D are prorated for the period of time the individual was
  in their position directly reporting to the Board / former Official Administrator or directly reporting to the President and Chief Executive Officer. Only
  individuals holding a position directly reporting to the Board / former Official Administrator or President and Chief Executive Officer during the
  current fiscal year are disclosed.

                                                                    2024               2023
                                                          SPP       SERP
                                                      Current                                      Account Balance(3) or            Account Balance(3) or
                                                                                                                          Change
                                                      Period Other                                   Accrued Benefit                  Accrued Benefit
                                                                       Total           Total                             During the
                                                      Benefit Costs(2)                                 Obligation                       Obligation
                                                                                                                           Year(4)
                                                      Costs(1)                                       March 31, 2023                   March 31, 2024
Athana Mentzelopoulos - President and Chief
 Executive Officer                                    $      14 $          -$   14 $           -$                      -$        14 $                     14
Sean Chilton - Interim President and Chief
 Executive Officer/Interim VP and Chief Operating
 Officer, Clinical Operations/VP, People, Health
 Professions and Information Technology                      30            -    30            21                    265          60                      325
Mauro Chies - President and Chief Executive
 Officer                                                     49            -    49            36                    217          73                      290
Ronda White - Chief Audit Executive                          14            -    14            12                    159          32                      191
Lori Anderson - Acting VP and Chief Operating
 Officer, Clinical Operations                                17            -    17            15                    135          32                      167
Deb Gordon - VP and Chief Operating Officer,
 Clinical Operations
    SERP                                                        -      (4)      (4)       (42)                      560       (560)                            -
    SPP                                                      13            -    13            23                    307       (307)                            -
Dr. Sid Viner - VP and Medical Director, Clinical
 Operations                                                  31            -    31            29                    152          51                      203
Dr. Peter Jamieson - Interim VP, Quality and Chief
 Medical Officer (5)                                            -          -      -            -                       -           -                           -
Dr. Francois Belanger - VP, Quality and Chief
 Medical Officer                                             23            -    23            34                    469       (469)                            -
Susan McGillivray - Interim VP, People and Health
 Professions
    SERP                                                        -      (1)      (1)        (9)                      147           2                      149
    SPP                                                      18            -    18            12                    148          20                      168
Karen Horon - VP, Cancer Care Alberta and
 Clinical Support Services                                   16            -    16             8                      48         20                       68
Natalie McMurtry - Interim VP, Provincial Clinical
 Excellence                                                     7          -     7             1                       5          8                       13
Dr. Braden Manns - Interim VP, Provincial Clinical
 Excellence (5)                                                 -          -      -            -                       -           -                           -
Kerry Bales - Chief Program Officer, Addiction
 and Mental Health and Correctional Health
 Services                                                    16            -    16            13                    211          40                      251
Holly Budd – Acting Senior Program Officer,
 Community Engagement and Communications (6)                    -          -      -            -                       -           -                           -
Gail Fredrickson - Interim VP, Community
 Engagement and Communications                                  6          -     6             7                      34       (34)                            -




  122                                                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                                             Financial Information



  Schedule 2E – Executive Supplemental Pension Plan and Supplemental
                Executive Retirement Plan (continued)
  Year ended March 31
      (in thousands)
                                                                        2024             2023
                                                              SPP       SERP
                                                            Current                                  Account Balance(3) or            Account Balance(3) or
                                                                                                                            Change
                                                            Period Other                               Accrued Benefit                  Accrued Benefit
                                                                             Total       Total                             During the
                                                            Benefit Costs(2)                             Obligation                       Obligation
                                                                                                                            Year(4)
                                                            Costs(1)                                   March 31, 2023                   March 31, 2024
      Colleen Turner - VP, Community Engagement
       and Communications                                         14           -   14           20                    220       (220)                     -
      Michael Lam - Interim VP, Corporate Services and
       Chief Financial Officer                                    12           -   12            9                      79        22                   101
      Colleen Purdy - VP, Corporate Services and Chief
       Financial Officer                                          18           -   18           26                      74       (74)                     -
      Andrea Beckwith-Ferraton - Interim General
       Counsel and Corporate Secretary                              4          -    4            3                      39          9                   48
      Tina Giesbrecht - General Counsel                             5          -    5            8                      91       (91)                     -
      Geoffrey Pradella - Chief Strategy Officer (7)                -          -     -           -                       -          -                     -

(1)     The SPP current period benefit costs are AHS contributions earned in the period.
(2)     Other SERP costs include retirement benefits, interest expense on the obligations, and amortization of actuarial gains and losses, offset
        by the expected return on the plan’s assets. AHS uses the straight-line method to amortize actuarial gains and losses over the expected
        average remaining service life of the plan members.
(3)     The account balance represents the total cumulative earned contributions to the SPP as well as cumulative investment gains or losses on
        the contributions.
(4)     Changes in the accrued benefit obligation include current period benefit cost, interest accruing on the obligations and the amortization of
        any actuarial gains or losses in the period. Changes in the account balance include the current benefit costs and investment gains or losses
        related to the account.
(5)     The incumbent is not an employee of AHS, and therefore not eligible for enrollment in the SPP.
(6)     The incumbent’s pensionable earnings were below the threshold for enrollment in the SPP.
(7)     The SPP had not fully vested at the time of the incumbent’s departure, and as a result no current period benefit costs were incurred.




  Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                                              123
Financial Information




Footnotes to the Schedules of Remuneration and Benefits
Year ended March 31, 2024
(in thousands)
         Definitions

          a.   For this schedule, full time equivalents (FTE) are determined by actual hours earned divided by 2,030.50 annual base hours
               (2023 – 2,022.75 hours).

          b.   Base salary is regular salary and includes all payments earned related to actual hours earned other than those reported as
               other cash benefits.

          c.   Other cash benefits include, as applicable, honoraria, acting pay, membership fees, and lump sum payments. Relocation
               expenses are excluded from compensation disclosure as they are considered to be recruiting costs to AHS and not part of
               compensation unless related to severance. Expense reimbursements are also excluded from compensation disclosure except
               where the expenses meet the definition of the other cash benefits listed above.

          d.   Other non-cash benefits include:
                   Employer’s current period benefit costs and other costs of supplemental pension plan and supplemental executive
                      retirement plans as defined in Schedule 2E
                   Employer’s share of employee benefit contributions and payments made on behalf of employees including pension,
                      health care, dental and vision coverage, out-of-country medical benefits, group life insurance, accidental disability and
                      dismemberment insurance, and long and short-term disability plans
                   Vacation accruals, and
                   Employer’s share of the cost of additional benefits including sabbaticals or other special leave with pay.

          e.   Severance includes direct or indirect payments to individuals upon termination which are not included in other cash benefits
               or other non-cash benefits.

         Board

          f.   The Board Chair is an Ex-Officio member on all Board committees.

          g.   These individuals did not claim honoraria.

         Former Official Administrator and Former Official Administrator Committee Participants

          h.   These individuals were participants of Official Administrator committees but are not AHS employees.

         Executive

          i.   Base salary reported for executives are the actual payments earned during the year, and is therefore contingent on the number
               of AHS’ work days in the year. For the year ended March 31, 2024, the number of work days at AHS was 260 (2023 – 261
               work days).

          j.   Athana Mentzelopoulos held management positions as both Official Administrator Advisor and Provisional Lead, Emergency
               Medical Services until July 28, 2023 at which time she left AHS. During this tenure, the incumbent was on temporary
               secondment from the Government of Alberta, and AHS reimbursed the Government of Alberta for the incumbent’s base salary
               and benefits. The incumbent was subsequently appointed to the position of President and Chief Executive Officer effective
               December 11, 2023.

          k.   Sean Chilton held the position of Vice President, People, Health Professions and Information Technology until August 28,
               2023 at which time he was appointed to Interim Vice President and Chief Operating Officer, Clinical Operations. The
               incumbent held the position of Interim Vice President and Chief Operating Officer, Clinical Operations until November 16,
               2023 at which time the incumbent was appointed to Interim President and Chief Executive Officer and became a direct report
               to the Board. The incumbent held the position of Interim President and Chief Executive Officer until December 11, 2023 at
               which time the incumbent resumed the role of Interim Vice President and Chief Operating Officer, Clinical Operations and
               resumed being a direct report to the President and Chief Executive Officer.

          l.   Mauro Chies held the position of President and Chief Executive Officer until November 16, 2023 at which time he left AHS
               from a leadership capacity. The incumbent’s severance is to be paid by way of salary continuance which will terminate, without
               a requirement of further notice or compensation from AHS, effective November 15, 2025. The reported severance includes
               24 months base salary plus accrued entitlements to pension and other benefits, as well as $21 in lieu of the loss of employee
               benefits. In addition, the incumbent received a vacation payout of $174 during the year for unused accrued vacation earned
               in prior periods; accrued vacation has been recorded in their compensation as a non-cash benefit in the period it was earned.

          m. Ronda White received a vacation payout of $18 for unused accrued vacation earned in prior periods; accrued vacation has
             been recorded in the compensation as a non-cash benefit in the period it was earned.

          n.   Lori Anderson held the position of Chief Zone Officer, Calgary Zone until November 30, 2023 at which time she was appointed




124                                                                                                     Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                                    Financial Information



               to Acting Vice President and Chief Operating Officer, Clinical Operations and became a direct report to the President and
               Chief Executive Officer. The incumbent held the position of Acting Vice President and Chief Operating Officer, Clinical
               Operations until December 11, 2023 at which time the incumbent resumed the role of Chief Zone Officer, Calgary Zone and
               was no longer a direct report to the President and Chief Executive Officer.

          o.   Deb Gordon held the position of Vice President and Chief Operating Officer, Clinical Operations until October 6, 2023 at which
               time she left AHS. The incumbent received salary and other accrued entitlements to the date of departure, as well as the
               reported severance. In addition, the incumbent received a vacation payout of $164 for unused accrued vacation at the time
               of departure; accrued vacation has been recorded in their compensation as a non-cash benefit in the period it was earned.
          p.   Dr. Peter Jamieson held the position of Interim Associate Medical Director, Clinical Operations until November 21, 2023 at
               which time he was appointed to Interim Vice President, Quality and Chief Medical Officer and became a direct report to the
               President and Chief Executive Officer. The incumbent’s remuneration is as per the terms of a Medical Administrative Services
               Agreement.

          q.   Dr. Francois Belanger held the position of Vice President, Quality and Chief Medical Officer until November 16, 2023 at which
               time he left AHS. The incumbent received salary and other accrued entitlements to the date of departure. The reported
               severance included 22 months base salary at the rate in effect at the date of departure, and 15% of the severance in lieu of
               benefits. In addition, the incumbent received a vacation payout of $106 for unused accrued vacation at the time of departure;
               accrued vacation has been recorded in their compensation as a non-cash benefit in the period it was earned.

          r.   Susan McGillivray held the position of Senior Program Officer, HR Talent and Workforce Strategies until August 28, 2023 at
               which time she was appointed to Interim Vice President, People and Health Professions and became a direct report to the
               President and Chief Executive Officer.

          s.   Karen Horon held the position of Interim Vice President, Cancer Care Alberta and Clinical Support Services until October 2,
               2023 at which time she was appointed to Vice President, Cancer Care Alberta and Clinical Support Services.

          t.   Natalie McMurtry held the position of Senior Program Officer, Sustainability Program Office until June 12, 2023 at which time
               she was appointed to Interim Vice President, Provincial Clinical Excellence and became a direct report to the President and
               Chief Executive Officer. Effective November 30, 2023, the incumbent took on the additional responsibilities as AHS Transition
               Lead. In addition, the incumbent received a vacation payout of $13 for unused accrued vacation at the time of departure;
               accrued vacation has been recorded in their compensation as a non-cash benefit in the period it was earned.

          u.   Dr. Braden Manns held the position of Interim Vice President, Provincial Clinical Excellence until June 9, 2023 at which time
               he left AHS from a leadership capacity. The incumbent is a participant in the Alberta Academic Medicine and Health Services
               Program (South Sector), and their remuneration is as per the terms of that agreement. The incumbent’s total remuneration is
               comprised of salary amounts from both AHS and the University of Calgary, and AHS reimburses the University for the
               incumbent’s base salary and benefits.

          v.   Holly Budd held the position of Executive Director, Communications until November 30, 2023 at which time she was appointed
               to Acting Senior Program Officer, Community Engagement and Communications and became a direct report to the President
               and Chief Executive Officer.

          w.   Gail Fredrickson held the position of Senior Program Officer, Communications until November 6, 2023 at which time she was
               appointed to Interim Vice President, Community Engagement and Communications and became a direct report to the
               President and Chief Executive Officer. The incumbent held the position of Interim Vice President, Community Engagement
               and Communications until November 30, 2023 at which time the incumbent resumed the role of Senior Program Officer,
               Communications and was no longer a direct report to the President and Chief Executive Officer.

          x.   Colleen Turner held the position of Vice President, Community Engagement and Communications until November 3, 2023 at
               which time she left AHS. The incumbent received salary and other accrued entitlements to the date of departure, as well as
               the reported severance. In addition, the incumbent received a vacation payout of $183 for unused accrued vacation at the
               time of departure; accrued vacation has been recorded in their compensation as a non-cash benefit in the period it was
               earned.

          y.   Michael Lam held the position of Chief Program Officer, Financial Operations until November 30, 2023 at which time he was
               appointed to Interim Vice President, Corporate Services and Chief Financial Officer and became a direct report to the
               President and Chief Executive Officer.

          z.   Colleen Purdy held the position of Vice President, Corporate Services and Chief Financial Officer until November 16, 2023 at
               which time she left AHS. The incumbent received salary and other accrued entitlements to the date of departure. The reported
               severance included 12 months base salary at the rate in effect at the date of departure, and 15% of the severance in lieu of
               benefits. In addition, the incumbent received a vacation payout of $73 for unused accrued vacation at the time of departure;
               accrued vacation has been recorded in their compensation as a non-cash benefit in the period it was earned.

          aa. Andrea Beckwith-Ferraton held the position of Chief Ethics and Compliance Officer until November 17, 2023 at which time
              she was appointed to Interim General Counsel and Corporate Secretary and became a direct report to the President and
              Chief Executive Officer.

          bb. Tina Giesbrecht held the position of General Counsel until November 16, 2023 at which time she left AHS. The incumbent



Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                                        125
Financial Information



                received salary and other accrued entitlements to the date of departure. The reported severance included 14 months base
                salary at the rate in effect at the date of departure, and 15% of the severance in lieu of benefits. In addition, the incumbent
                received a vacation payout of $111 for unused accrued vacation at the time of departure; accrued vacation has been recorded
                in their compensation as a non-cash benefit in the period it was earned.

          cc. Geoffrey Pradella was appointed to the position of Chief Strategy Officer effective July 12, 2023. The incumbent held the
              position until November 16, 2023 at which time the incumbent left AHS. The incumbent received salary and other accrued
              entitlements to the date of departure. The reported severance included 5 months base salary at the rate in effect at the date
              of departure, and 15% of the severance in lieu of benefits. In addition, the incumbent received a vacation payout of $8 for
              unused accrued vacation at the time of departure.


         Termination Obligations

          dd. In the case of termination without just cause by AHS, the incumbent shall receive severance pay equal to one month base
              salary for each completed month of service during the first year of the term or, after completion of one year of service of the
              term, 12 months base salary. Such severance will be paid in equal monthly instalments. There was no severance associated
              with the temporary position.
          ee. In the case of termination without just cause by AHS, the incumbent shall receive severance pay equal to 24 months’ salary
              and benefits.

          ff.   The incumbent’s termination benefits have not been predetermined.

          gg. There is no severance associated with the Medical Administrative Services Agreement.

          hh. SPP and SERP

                Based on the provision of the applicable SPP and SERP, the following outlines the benefits received by individuals who
                terminated employment with AHS within the 2023-24 fiscal period. As a result of retirement or termination, the incumbents
                are entitled to the benefits accrued to them up to the date of retirement or termination. For participants of SPP, the benefit
                includes the account balances as at March 31, 2023 and the current period benefit costs and investment gains or losses
                related to the account that were incurred during the current year. For participants of SERP, the benefit includes the accrued
                benefit obligation as at March 31, 2023, the current period benefit cost, interest accruing on the obligations, the amortization
                of any actuarial gains or losses in the period, and gains or losses due to curtailment that were incurred during the current year
                as identified in Schedule 2E. The AHS obligations are paid through either a monthly, annual, or lump sum payment:


                                                     Supplemental Plan      Benefit
                       Incumbent (1)                                                                   Frequency            Payment Terms
                                                    Commencement Date (not in thousands)

         Deb Gordon - VP and Chief Operating           January 4, 2005              $4,156               Monthly         For a fixed term of 10
          Officer, Clinical Operations (SERP)                                                                           years from November 1,
                                                                                                                        2023 to October 1, 2033

         Deb Gordon - VP and Chief Operating          November 1, 2012        $42,872 increasing         Annually      For a fixed term of 8 years
          Officer, Clinical Operations (SPP)                                  annually to $43,300                       from November 2023 to
                                                                                                                              January 2030

         Dr. Francois Belanger - VP, Quality             May 1, 2012         $136,699 increasing         Annually      For a fixed term of 4 years
          and Chief Medical Officer (SPP)                                    annually to $138,066                       from December 2023 to
                                                                                                                              January 2026

         Colleen Turner - VP, Community                 March 1, 2010              $247,986               Once              December 2023
          Engagement and Communications
          (SPP)

         Colleen Purdy - VP, Corporate                   July 1, 2020         $33,014 increasing         Annually      For a fixed term of 3 years
          Services and Chief Financial Officer                                annually to $33,345                       from December 2023 to
          (SPP)                                                                                                               January 2025

         Tina Giesbrecht - General Counsel           September 17, 2012            $104,072               Once              December 2023
          (SPP)


       (1) Pertains only to those individuals for which the applicable SPP was fully vested at the time their employment with AHS ended,
           and in a position directly reporting to the Board / former Official Administrator or President and Chief Executive Officer at the time
           of departure.




126                                                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                  Financial Information




Schedule 3 – Consolidated Schedule of Segment Disclosures
Year ended March 31
(in thousands)




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                   127
Financial Information




Schedule 3 – Consolidate Schedule of Segment Disclosures
(continued)
Year ended March 31
(in thousands)




128                                          Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                                                      Financial Information




Health Quality Council of Alberta
Financial Statements
Table of Contents

         Management’s Responsibility for Financial Reporting ........................................................130

         Independent Auditor’s Report .......................................................................................................131

         Statement of Operations ...................................................................................................................134

         Statement of Financial Position .....................................................................................................135

         Statement of Change in Net Financial Assets ...........................................................................136

         Statement of Cash Flows ...................................................................................................................137

         Notes to the Financial Statements ................................................................................................138

         Schedule 1 – Expenses – Detailed by Object .............................................................................148

         Schedule 2 – Salary and Benefits Disclosure ............................................................................149

         Schedule 3 – Related Party Transactions...................................................................................150




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                                                          129
Financial Information




Management’s Responsibility for Financial Reporting
The accompanying financial statements are the responsibility of management and have been reviewed
and approved by Senior Management. The financial statements were prepared in accordance with
Canadian Public Sector Accounting Standards, and of necessity, include some amounts that are based
on estimates and judgement.
To discharge its responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of financial reporting, management
maintains a system of internal accounting controls comprising written policies, standards and procedures,
a formal authorization structure, and satisfactory processes for reviewing internal controls. This system
provides management with reasonable assurance that transactions are in accordance with governing
legislation and are properly authorized, reliable financial records are maintained, and assets are
adequately safeguarded.
The Health Quality Council of Alberta’s Board of Directors carries out their responsibility for the financial
statements through the Audit and Finance Committee. The Committee meets with management and the
Auditor General of Alberta to review financial matters and recommends the financial statements to the
Health Quality Council of Alberta Board of Directors for approval upon finalization of the audit. The
Auditor General of Alberta has open and complete access to the Audit and Finance Committee.
The Auditor General of Alberta provides an independent audit of the financial statements. His
examination is conducted in accordance with Canadian Generally Accepted Auditing Standards and
includes tests and procedures, which allow him to report on the fairness of the financial statements
prepared by management.


On behalf of the Health Quality Council of Alberta.




[Original signed by]                                                         [Original signed by]

 Chief Executive Officer                                                     Director, Financial Services
 Charlene McBrien-Morrison                                                   Jessica Wing
 May 30, 2024                                                                May 30, 2024




130                                                                              Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                      Financial Information




Independent Auditor’s Report


To the Board of Directors of the Health Quality Council of Alberta


Report on the Financial Statements


Opinion
I have audited the financial statements of the Health Quality Council of Alberta, which comprise the
statement of financial position as at March 31, 2024, and the statements of operations, change in
net financial assets, and cash flows for the year then ended, and notes to the financial statements,
including a summary of significant accounting policies.

In my opinion, the accompanying financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of the Health Quality Council of Alberta as at March 31, 2024, and the results of its
operations, its changes in net financial assets, and its cash flows for the year then ended in
accordance with Canadian public sector accounting standards.

Basis for opinion
I conducted my audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards. My
responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor's Responsibilities for the
Audit of the Financial Statements section of my report. I am independent of the Health Quality
Council of Alberta in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to my audit of the
financial statements in Canada, and I have fulfilled my other ethical responsibilities in accordance
with these requirements. I believe that the audit evidence I have obtained is sufficient and
appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion.

Other information
Management is responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the
information included in the Annual Report, but does not include the financial statements and my
auditor’s report thereon. The Annual Report is expected to be made available to me after the date of
this auditor’s report.

My opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and I do not express
any form of assurance conclusion thereon.

In connection with my audit of the financial statements, my responsibility is to read the other
information identified above and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially
inconsistent with the financial statements or my knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise
appears to be materially misstated.

If, based on the work I will perform on this other information, I conclude that there is a material
misstatement of this other information, I am required to communicate the matter to those charged
with governance.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                       131
Financial Information



Responsibilities of management and those charged with governance for the financial
statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements in
accordance with Canadian public sector accounting standards, and for such internal control as
management determines is necessary to enable the preparation of the financial statements that are
free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.

In preparing the financial statements, management is responsible for assessing the Health Quality
Council of Alberta’s ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related
to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless an intention exists to
liquidate or to cease operations, or there is no realistic alternative but to do so.

Those charged with governance are responsible for overseeing the Health Quality Council of
Alberta’s financial reporting process.

Auditor's responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements
My objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a
whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor's
report that includes my opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a
guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing
standards will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from
fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably
be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial
statements.

As part of an audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards, I exercise
professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit. I also:
 Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due
    to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain
    audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion. The risk of
    not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from
    error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the
    override of internal control.
 Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit
    procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an
    opinion on the effectiveness of the Health Quality Council of Alberta’s internal control.
 Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting
    estimates and related disclosures made by management.
 Conclude on the appropriateness of management’s use of the going concern basis of accounting
    and, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to
    events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Health Quality Council of Alberta’s
    ability to continue as a going concern. If I conclude that a material uncertainty exists, I am
    required to draw attention in my auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the financial
    statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify my opinion. My conclusions are
    based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of my auditor’s report. However, future
    events or conditions may cause the Health Quality Council of Alberta to cease to continue as a
    going concern.




132                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                      Financial Information



   Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements, including
    the disclosures, and whether the financial statements represent the underlying transactions
    and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation.

I communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the planned
scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in
internal control that I identify during my audit.




[Original signed by W. Doug Wylie FCPA, FCMA, ICD.D]
Auditor General

May 30, 2024
Edmonton, Alberta




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                       133
Financial Information




Statement of Operations
Year ended March 31
(thousands of dollars)

                                                                   2024                      2023

                                                        Budget            Actual            Actual
                                                        (Note 5)
Revenues
      Alberta Health transfers
        Base operating                              $     7,559       $    7,672       $        7,559

        Restricted operating (Note 8)                         -            1,053                     -

      Other government transfer (Note 8)                  1,231              125                    92

      Interest income                                       27               132                    58

      Other revenue                                           -                25                   94
                                                          8,817            9,007                7,803


Expenses (Schedule 1)
      Administration                                      1,588            1,544                1,834

      Health system analytics                             3,323            3,010                3,385

      Health system improvement                           1,817            1,629                1,724

      Communications and engagement                       1,801            1,391                1,619

      Ministerial assessment/study (Note 8)               1,231            1,178                    92

      Other assessment/study                                  -                 -                   94
                                                          9,760            8,752                8,748



Annual operating (deficit) surplus                        (943)              255                (945)

Accumulated operating surplus, beginning of year          1,484            1,951                2,896

Accumulated operating surplus, end of year          $      541        $    2,206       $        1,951




The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




134                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                    Financial Information




Statement of Financial Position
Year ended March 31
(thousands of dollars)

                                                                          2024             2023
Financial Assets
   Cash                                                              $    4,346       $          2,600
   Accounts receivable (Note 7)                                                37                  709
                                                                          4,383                  3,309
Liabilities
   Accounts payable and other accrued liabilities                         1,069                    691
   Unspent deferred contributions (Note 8)                                1,609                  1,387
   Employee future benefits (Note 9)                                           43                   35
   Deferred lease inducements (Note 10)                                        16                     -
                                                                          2,737                  2,113


Net Financial Assets                                                      1,646                  1,196


Non-Financial Assets
   Tangible capital assets (Note 11)                                       463                     657
   Purchased intangibles                                                       12                     -
   Prepaid expenses                                                            85                   98
                                                                           560                     755


Net Assets                                                                2,206                  1,951


Net Assets
Accumulated operating surplus (Note 13)                              $    2,206       $          1,951




Contractual obligations (Note 12)


The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                     135
Financial Information




Statement of Change in Net Financial Assets
Year ended March 31
(thousands of dollars)


                                                                     2024                        2023
                                                          Budget            Actual              Actual
                                                          (Note 5)


Annual operating (deficit) surplus                    $      (943)      $      255          $     (945)


Acquisition of tangible capital assets (Note 11)               (8)             (16)               (572)
Purchase of intangible assets                                    -             (12)
Amortization of tangible capital assets (Note 11)             217              210                  389
Loss on disposal and write down of tangible capital
assets (Note 11)                                                 -                -                  33
Decrease in prepaid expenses                                     -              13                   28
(Decrease) / Increase in net financial assets in
the year                                                     (734)             450              (1,067)
Net financial assets, beginning of year                      1,196           1,196                2,263
Net financial assets, end of year                     $       462       $    1,646          $     1,196




The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




136                                                                           Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                      Financial Information




 Statement of Cash Flows
 Year ended March 31
 (thousands of dollars)
                                                                                   2024           2023
Operating Transactions
   Annual operating surplus (deficit)                                          $     255      $     (945)
   Non-cash items:
    Amortization of tangible capital assets (Note 11)                                210              389
    Loss on disposal and write down of tangible capital assets (Note 11)                  -             33
    Amortization of deferred lease inducements (Note 10)                              (2)             (37)
    Increase in employee future benefits (Note 9)                                         8              8
                                                                                     471            (552)
   Decrease (Increase) in accounts receivable (Note 7)                               672            (388)
   Decrease in prepaid expenses                                                       13                28
   Increase (Decrease) in accounts payable and other accrued liabilities             378              (17)
   Increase in unspent deferred contributions (Note 8)                               222            1,108
   Increase in deferred lease inducement (Note 10)                                    18                  -
   Cash provided by operating transactions                                         1,774              179


Capital Transactions
   Acquisition of tangible capital assets (Note 11)                                  (16)           (572)
   Purchase of intangible assets                                                     (12)                 -
   Cash applied to capital transactions                                              (28)           (572)


Increase (Decrease) in cash                                                        1,746            (393)


Cash at beginning of year                                                          2,600            2,993
Cash at end of year                                                            $   4,346      $     2,600




The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




 Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                      137
Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements
Year ended March 31, 2024
(thousands of dollars)

Note 1            AUTHORITY
                  The Health Quality Council of Alberta (HQCA) is a government not-for-profit organization formed
                  under the Health Quality Council of Alberta Act.
                  Pursuant to the Act, the HQCA has a mandate to promote and improve patient safety, person-
                  centered care and health service quality on a province-wide basis.
                  The HQCA is exempt from income taxes under the Income Tax Act.

Note 2            SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND
                  REPORTING PRACTICES
                  These financial statements are prepared in accordance with Canadian public sector accounting
                  standards (PSAS).

                  (a)    Reporting Entity
                  The financial statements reflect the assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses of the HQCA.

                  (b) Basis of Financial Reporting
                  Revenues
                  All revenues are reported on the accrual basis of accounting.
                  Revenues from transactions with performance obligations are recognized when HQCA provides the
                  promised services to the payors. Course fees are recognized in the year that courses are
                  delivered.
                  Cash received for which services have not been provided by year end is recognized as unearned
                  revenue.
                  Revenues from transactions with no performance obligations are recognized at their realizable
                  value when HQCA has the authority to claim or retain an inflow of economic resources and
                  identifies a past transaction or event that gives rise to an asset.

                  Government transfers
                  Transfers from all governments are referred to as government transfers.
                  Government transfers and the associated externally restricted investment income are recognized
                  as deferred contributions if the eligibility criteria for use of the transfer, or the stipulations together
                  with the HQCA’s actions and communications as to the use of the transfer, create a liability. These
                  transfers are recognized as revenue as the stipulations are met and, when applicable, the HQCA
                  complies with its communicated use of these transfers.
                  All other government transfers, without stipulations for the use of the transfer, are recognized as
                  revenue when the transfer is authorized and the HQCA meets the eligibility criteria (if any).

                  Expenses
                  Expenses are reported on an accrual basis. The cost of all goods consumed and services received
                  during the year are expensed.
                  Grants and transfers are recognized as expenses when the transfer is authorized and eligibility
                  criteria have been met by the recipient.




138                                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                     Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements
Year ended March 31, 2024
(thousands of dollars)

Note 2            SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND
                  REPORTING PRACTICES (CONT’D)
                  (b) Basis of Financial Reporting (Cont’d)
                  Valuation of Financial Assets and Liabilities
                  The HQCA’s financial assets and liabilities are generally measured as follows:

                    Financial Statement Component                         Measurement

                    Cash                                                  Cost

                    Accounts receivable                                   Lower of cost or net recoverable value

                    Accounts payable and other accrued liabilities        Cost

                  The HQCA does not hold equities traded in an active market, nor engage in derivative contracts or
                  foreign currency transactions. The HQCA is not exposed to remeasurement gains or losses and,
                  consequently, a statement of remeasurement gains and losses is not presented .

                  Financial Assets
                  Financial assets are assets that could be used to discharge existing liabilities or finance future
                  operations and are not for consumption in the normal course of operations.

                  Financial assets are the HQCA’s financial claims on external organizations and individuals at the
                  year end.

                  Cash
                  Cash comprises cash on hand and demand deposits.

                  Accounts Receivable
                  Accounts receivable are recognized at the lower of cost or net recoverable value. A valuation
                  allowance is recognized when recovery is uncertain.

                  Liabilities
                  Liabilities represent present obligations of the HQCA to external organizations and individuals
                  arising from past transactions or events occurring before the year end, the settlement of which is
                  expected to result in the future sacrifice of economic benefits. They are recognized when there is
                  an appropriate basis of measurement and management can reasonably estimate the amounts.

                  Deferred Lease Inducements
                  Deferred lease inducements represent amounts received for leasehold improvements and the value
                  of a rent-free period. Lease inducements are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis over




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                       139
Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements
Year ended March 31, 2024
(thousands of dollars)

Note 2            SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND
                  REPORTING PRACTICES (CONT’D)
                  (b)       Basis of Financial Reporting (Cont’d)
                  the term of the related lease and the amortization is recognized as a reduction of rent expense for
                  the year.

                  Employee Future Benefits
                  The HQCA Board has approved a defined contribution Supplementary Executive Retirement Plan
                  (SERP) for certain members of its executive staff. The SERP supplements the benefit under the
                  HQCA registered plan that is limited by the Income Tax Act (Canada). The HQCA contributes a
                  certain percentage of an eligible employee’s pensionable earnings in excess of the limits of the
                  Income Tax Act (Canada). This plan provides participants with an account balance at retirement
                  based on the contributions made to the plan and investment income earned on the contributions
                  based on investment decisions made by the participants.

                  Non-Financial Assets
                  Non-financial assets are acquired, constructed, or developed assets that do not normally provide
                  resources to discharge existing liabilities, but instead:

                  (a) are normally employed to deliver government services;
                  (b) may be consumed in the normal course of operations; and
                  (c) are not for sale in the normal course of operations.
                  Non-financial assets are limited to tangible capital assets, purchased intangibles and prepaid
                  expenses.

                  Tangible Capital Assets
                  Tangible capital assets are recognized at cost less amortization, which includes amounts that are
                  directly related to the acquisition, design, construction, development, improvement or betterment of
                  the assets. Cost includes overhead directly attributable to construction and development, as well as
                  interest costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition or construction of the asset.

                  The cost, less residual value, of the tangible capital assets, excluding work-in-progress, is
                  amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives as follows:

                        Computer hardware and software      5 years

                        Office equipment                    10 years

                        Leasehold improvements              Over term of the lease

                  Tangible capital assets are written down when conditions indicate that they no longer contribute to
                  the HQCA’s ability to provide services, or when the value of future economic benefits associated
                  with the tangible capital assets are less than their book value. The net write-downs are accounted
                  for as expenses in the Statement of Operations.




140                                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                     Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements
Year ended March 31, 2024
(thousands of dollars)

Note 2            SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND
                  REPORTING PRACTICES (CONT’D)
                  (b)    Basis of Financial Reporting (Cont’d)
                  Purchased Intangible Assets
                  Purchased intangibles are recognized at cost less amortization, and tested regularly for impairment.
                  The cost, less any residual value, of purchased intangible assets is amortized on a straight-line
                  basis over its useful life in a manner appropriate to its nature and use, which is normally the
                  shortest of the technological, commercial, and legal life.

                  Prepaid Expenses
                  Prepaid expenses are recognized at cost and amortized based on the terms of the agreement.

                  Funds and Reserves
                  Certain amounts, as approved by the Board of Directors, are set aside in accumulated operating
                  surplus for future operating and capital purposes. Transfers to/from funds and reserves are an
                  adjustment to the respective fund when approved.

                  Measurement Uncertainty
                  Measurement uncertainty exists when there is a variance between the recognized or disclosed
                  amount and another reasonably possible amount. The amounts recognized for amortization of
                  tangible capital assets are based on estimates of the useful life of the related assets. Actual results
                  could differ from estimates.


Note 3            CHANGES IN ACCOUNTING STANDARDS

                  On April 1, 2023, HQCA adopted PS 3400 Revenue. There were no changes to the measurement
                  of revenues on adoption of the new standard.

                  At the beginning of the same fiscal reporting period, the HQCA also adopted the PSG-8 Purchased
                  Intangibles Guideline. The financial statements now include purchased intangibles recognized as
                  assets when they meet the asset definition and general recognition criteria. Prior to adoption,
                  purchased intangibles were expensed.

                  HQCA used prospective application to adopt the new standard. As a result, 2023 comparatives are
                  not restated.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                      141
Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements
Year ended March 31, 2024
(thousands of dollars)

Note 4            FUTURE CHANGES IN ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
                  On April 1, 2026, HQCA will adopt the following new conceptual framework and accounting
                  standard approved by the Public Sector Accounting Board:

                  The Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting in the Public Sector
                  The Conceptual Framework is the foundation for public sector financial reporting standard setting. It
                  replaces the conceptual aspects of Section PS 1000 Financial Statement Concepts and Section PS
                  1100 Financial Statement Objectives. The conceptual framework highlights considerations
                  fundamental for the consistent application of accounting issues in the absence of specific
                  standards.

                  PS 1202 Financial Statement Presentation
                  Section PS 1202 sets out general and specific requirements for the presentation of information in
                  general purpose financial statements. The financial statement presentation principles are based on
                  the concepts within the Conceptual Framework.
                  Management is currently assessing the impact of the conceptual framework and the standard on
                  the financial statements.

Note 5            BUDGET
                  The HQCA’s 2023-2024 operating budget was approved by the Board of Directors on January 26,
                  2023 and submitted to the Ministry of Health.

Note 6            FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
                  The HQCA has the following financial instruments: cash, accounts receivable, accounts payable
                  and other accrued liabilities.
                  The HQCA has exposure to the following risks from its use of financial instruments: interest rate
                  risk, liquidity risk, price risk and credit risk.

                  (a) Interest rate risk
                  The HQCA is exposed to the interest rate associated with cash held in the bank. The interest rate
                  risk is minimal.

                  (b) Liquidity risk
                  Liquidity risk is the risk that the HQCA will encounter difficulty in meeting obligations associated
                  with financial liabilities. The HQCA enters into transactions to purchase goods and services on
                  credit. Liquidity risk is measured by reviewing the HQCA’s future net cash flows for the possibility of
                  negative net cash flow. The HQCA manages the liquidity risk resulting from its accounts payable
                  obligations by maintaining adequate cash resources.

                  (c) Credit risk
                  The HQCA is exposed to credit risk from potential non-payment of accounts receivable. During the
                  fiscal year most of the HQCA’s receivables are from provincial agencies; therefore the credit risk is
                  minimized.




142                                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                          Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements
Year ended March 31, 2024
(thousands of dollars)

Note 7            ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE
                                                                            2024               2023

               Accounts receivable                                      $       37        $     109

               Restricted operating grant receivable (Note 8)                      -            600

                                                                        $       37        $     709


Note 8            UNSPENT DEFERRED CONTRIBUTIONS
                                                                                2024                                 2023

                                                             Alberta
                                                             Health             Other                 Total          Total

               Balance at beginning of the year          $          -       $          1,387     $     1,387     $     279

               Cash received or receivable during the
               year                                             2,000                  (600)           1,400         1,200

               Recognized as revenue                         (1,053)                   (125)          (1,178)          (92)

               Balance at end of year                    $       947        $           662      $     1,609     $   1,387

                  The unspent deferred contribution from Alberta Health at the end of the year is externally restricted
                  to support a task force to provide recommendations to the Minister. The balance in other relates to
                  an externally restricted grant from the Ministry of Mental Health and Addictions (MHA). HQCA will
                  not receive $600 from MHA that was recorded in prior year as a receivable.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                              143
Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements
Year ended March 31, 2024
(thousands of dollars)

Note 9            EMPLOYEE FUTURE BENEFITS
                  The HQCA participates in the Local Authorities Pension Plan (LAPP), a multi-employer defined
                  benefit pension plan.

                  The HQCA accounts for this multi-employer pension plan on a defined contribution basis. The
                  HQCA is not responsible for future funding of the plan deficit other than through contribution
                  increases. Pension expense recorded in the financial statements is equivalent to HQCA’s annual
                  contributions of $388 for the year ended March 31, 2024 (2023 - $374).

                  At December 31, 2023, the Local Authorities Pension Plan reported a surplus of $15,056,520 (2022
                  – surplus of $12,671,000).

                  The Supplementary Executive Retirement Plan (SERP) payable at year ended March 31, 2024 is
                  $43 (2023 - $35). The current year contribution related to this plan is $8 (2023 - $8). No payment
                  has been made to plan member at retirement in the current year.


Note 10           DEFERRED LEASE INDUCEMENTS
                  The HQCA received a lease inducement in the form of free rent relating to a lease renewal of the
                  premises effective April 1, 2024. This amount will be amortized on a straight-line basis over the
                  term of the related lease and the amortization is recognized as a reduction of rent expense.

                                                                         2024          2023

                         Lease inducements - rent free periods       $      18     $    209

                         Less accumulated amortization                     (2)         (209)

                                                                     $      16     $          -




144                                                                                    Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                           Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements
Year ended March 31, 2024
(thousands of dollars)

Note 11            TANGIBLE CAPITAL ASSETS
                                                                2024                                    2023
                                                   Computer
                                     Office       Hardware &      Leasehold
                                   Equipment       Software     improvements           Total           Total


 Estimated useful life                 10 years       5 years   Over term of the
                                                                     lease


 Historical Cost
 Beginning of year                 $      403     $     1,387    $     1,013       $   2,803     $    2,378
 Additions                                   -             16               -            16             572
 Disposals, including write-
 downs                                     (1)           (54)               -           (55)           (147)
                                          402           1,349          1,013           2,764          2,803


 Accumulated Amortization
 Beginning of year                        336            797           1,013           2,146          1,871
 Amortization expense                      28            182                -           210             389
 Effect of disposals, including
 write-downs                               (1)           (54)               -           (55)           (114)
                                          363            925           1,013           2,301          2,146


 Net book value at March 31,
 2024                              $       39     $      424     $          -      $    463




 Net book value at March 31,
 2023                              $       67     $      590     $          -                    $      657




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                            145
Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements
Year ended March 31, 2024
(thousands of dollars)

Note 12           CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
                  Contractual obligations are obligations of the HQCA to others that will become liabilities in the
                  future when the terms of those contracts or agreements are met.

                  Estimated payment requirements for each of the next five years and thereafter are as follows:

                                            Year ended           Operating
                                             March 31             Lease

                                            2024 – 25        $      324
                                            2025 – 26               335
                                            2026 – 27               335
                                            2027 – 28               347
                                            2028 – 29               358
                                            Thereafter             1,557
                                                             $     3,256


Note 13           ACCUMULATED OPERATING SURPLUS
                  Accumulated operating surplus is comprised of the following:

                                                                        2024                                         2023

                                    Investment in
                                       Tangible
                                        Capital
                                     Assets and           Internally           Unrestricted
                                      intangible          Restricted             Surplus
                                       assets(a)          Surplus(b)             (Deficit)          Total            Total




 Balance, April 1, 2023             $      657        $      1,294           $          -      $     1,951       $     2,896

 Annual operating surplus
 (deficit)                                    -                     -                255               255             (945)

 Net investments in capital
 assets and intangible assets             (182)                     -                182                    -                -

 Transfers, prior year restricted             -             (1,294)                1,294                    -                -

 Transfers, current year
 restricted                                   -              1,731                (1,731)                   -                -




146                                                                                           Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                   Financial Information




 Balance, March 31, 2024           $       475       $     1,731        $          -     $     2,206       $     1,951

Notes to the Financial Statements
Year ended March 31, 2024
(thousands of dollars)

Note 13           ACCUMULATED OPERATING SURPLUS (CONT’D)
 (a)    Investment in tangible capital assets and intangible assets represents the net book value of internally funded
        tangible capital assets and intangibles assets. These assets are restricted and are not available for any other
        purpose.

 (b)    The internally restricted surplus represents amounts set aside by the Board for future purposes. Those amounts
        are not available for other purposes without the approval of the Board. Internally restricted surplus based on the
        annual work plan is summarized as follows:

                                                                       2024             2023

                 Measure/monitor                               $        300       $      152

                 Engage                                               1,253              732

                 Improve                                                178              410

                                                               $      1,731       $    1,294


Note 14           COMPARATIVE FIGURES
                  Certain 2023 figures have been reclassified, where necessary, to conform to the 2024 presentation.

Note 15           APPROVAL OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
The financial statements were approved by the HQCA Board of Directors on May 30, 2024.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                    147
Financial Information




Schedule 1 – Expenses – Detailed by Object
Year ended March 31
(thousands of dollars)

                                                                    2024                             2023

                                                        Budget                 Actual               Actual



Salaries and benefits                               $       6,140          $      5,104       $         4,807

Supplies, services and other                                3,403                 3,438                 3,552

Amortization of tangible capital assets (Note 11)            217                    210                     389

                                                    $       9,760          $      8,752       $         8,748




148                                                                               Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                 Financial Information




Schedule 2 – Salary and Benefits Disclosure
Year ended March 31
(thousands of dollars)

                                                                     2024                                    2023

                                                Base                      Other Non-
                                                           Other Cash       Cash
                                              Salary (1)   Benefits (2)   Benefits (3)       Total           Total



 Board of Directors-Chair                 $            -   $       20       $       -    $       20      $      19

 Board of Directors-Members                            -           28               -            28             34

 Chief Executive Officer                            255            16              27           298            276

                                          $         255    $       64       $      27    $      346      $     329




 (1) Base salary includes pensionable base pay.

 (2) Other cash benefits include honoraria for board members, vehicle allowance, and vacation payout. There were
     no bonuses paid in 2024.

 (3) Other non-cash benefits include: employer’s portion of all employee benefits and contributions or payments
     made on behalf of employees, including pension, Supplementary Executive Retirement Plan, health care
     benefits, dental coverage, vision coverage, out of country medical benefits, group life insurance, accidental
     disability and dismemberment insurance, employee assistance program, Canadian Pension Plan, Employment
     Insurance and fair market value parking.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                     149
Financial Information




Schedule 3 – Related Party Transactions
Year ended March 31
(thousands of dollars)
Related parties are those entities consolidated or accounted for on a modified equity basis in the Government of
Alberta’s Consolidated Financial Statements. Related parties also include key management personnel and close
family members of those individuals in the HQCA. The HQCA and its employees paid or collected certain taxes and
fees set by regulation for premiums, licenses, and other charges. These amounts were incurred in the normal course
of business, reflect charges applicable to all users, and have been excluded from this schedule.

The HQCA had the following transactions with related parties recorded in the Statement of Operations and the
Statement of Financial Position at the amount of consideration agreed upon between the related parties.

                                                                        2024                2023



              Revenues

                 Grants                                           $        8,850       $     7,651

                 Other                                                          26              94

                                                                  $        8,876       $     7,745

              Expenses

                 Other services                                   $            207     $       117



              Amount due from related parties                     $              -     $       694



              Amount due to related parties                       $        1,614       $        33




150                                                                                  Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                                                             Financial Information




Other Financial Information


Table of Contents
         Department of Health ........................................................................................................................152
         Ministry of Health ................................................................................................................................159
         Public Interest Disclosure (Whistleblower Protection) Act ...................................................160




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                                                                  151
Financial Information



Department of Health

Statement of Credit or Recovery (unaudited)

Year ended March 31, 2024
(in thousands)


                                                                                 2024

                                                              Actual                            Total Amount
                                              Authorized     Revenue           Unearned          Received /       (Shortfall) /
                                              Spending      Recognized         Revenue           Receivable       Excess (1)

 Expense Amounts
 Ministry Support Services
     Strategic Corporate Support (a)   $            2,024   $      2,024   $            -       $        2,024   $             -
 Population and Public Health
     Research and Support Programs (b)              1,000            -                  -                  -             (1,000)
                                       $            3,024   $      2,024   $            -       $        2,024   $       (1,000)


 (a)   The Department receives revenue from the Department of Mental Health and Addiction to recover the cost of
       providing shared corporate services.
 (b)   The Department receives revenue from Health Canada to enhance existing health services to persons with
       chronic Hepatitis C virus infection.
 (1)
       Shortfall is deducted from current year’s corresponding funding authority.




152                                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                   Financial Information



Department of Health


Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited)

Year ended March 31, 2024
(in thousands)

                                                                                       Adjusted                        Over
Expense Vote by Program                     Voted      SupplementaryAdjustments         Voted        Voted           Expended/
                                                   (1)           (2)     (3)                               (4)
Operating Expense                         Estimate      Estimate                       Estimate    Actuals         (Unexpended)


1   Ministry Support Services
1.1 Minister's Office                     $      1,016    $      -   $        -    $       1,016   $      1,207    $          191
1.2 Deputy Minister's Office                     1,534           -            -            1,534          1,542                 8
1.3 Strategic Corporate Support                 42,159           -            -          42,159          45,464           3,305
1.4 Policy Development and Strategic
       Support                                  21,095           -            -          21,095          28,162           7,067
1.5 Health Advocates' Office                     3,545           -            -            3,545          2,215          (1,330)
                                                69,349           -            -          69,349          78,590           9,241


2   Alberta Health Services
2.1 Continuing Care                           1,230,000          -            -        1,230,000       1,271,792        41,792
2.2 Community Care                            1,782,961          -            -        1,782,961       1,779,873         (3,088)
2.3 Home Care                                  845,000           -            -         845,000         599,207        (245,793)
2.4 Acute Care                                4,200,000          -            -        4,200,000       4,402,013       202,013
2.5 Emergency Medical Services                 547,000           -            -         547,000         508,957         (38,043)
2.6 Diagnostic and Therapeutic Services       2,420,000          -            -        2,420,000       2,445,940        25,940
2.7 Population and Public Health               408,000           -            -         408,000         409,213           1,213
2.8 Health Workforce
       Education and Research                  100,000           -            -         100,000          97,133          (2,867)
2.9 Information Technology                     450,000           -            -         450,000         485,838         35,838
2.10 Support Services                         1,900,000          -            -        1,900,000       1,979,113        79,113
2.11 Administration                            503,000           -            -         503,000         510,970           7,970
2.12 Drugs and Gases                           751,650           -            -         751,650         738,969         (12,681)
                                          15,137,611             -            -    15,137,611      15,229,018           91,407


3   Health System Capacity                      75,000           -            -          75,000          61,814         (13,186)


4   Physician Compensation and Development
4.1 Program Support                              8,137           -            -            8,137          7,869            (268)
4.2 Physician Services                        5,278,815          -       (4,458)       5,274,357       5,354,626        80,269
4.3 Physician Education and Recruitment        438,725           -            -         438,725         358,109         (80,616)
                                              5,725,677          -       (4,458)       5,721,219       5,720,604           (615)




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                        153
Financial Information



Department of Health


Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited) (continued)

Year ended March 31, 2024
(in thousands)

                                                                                        Adjusted                       Over
 Expense Vote by Program                           Voted     SupplementaryAdjustments    Voted           Voted       Expended/
 Operating Expense                               Estimate (1) Estimate (2)     (3)
                                                                                        Estimate       Actuals (4) (Unexpended)


 5    Drugs and Supplemental Health Benefits
 5.1 Program Support                             $ 54,949    $         -   $       -    $     54,949   $    58,979   $     4,030
 5.2 Outpatient Cancer Therapy Drugs               351,000             -           -        351,000        347,300        (3,700)
 5.3 Outpatient Specialized High Cost Drugs        142,449             -           -        142,449        141,700          (749)
 5.4 Seniors Drug Benefits                         692,690             -           -        692,690        735,916        43,226
 5.5 Seniors Dental, Optical and
        Supplemental Health Benefits               149,800             -           -        149,800        150,205          405
 5.6 Non-Group Drug Benefits                       200,000             -           -        200,000        217,629        17,629
 5.7 Non-Group Supplemental Health Benefits            975             -           -             975         2,651         1,676
 5.8 Assured Income for the Severely
        Handicapped Health Benefit                 251,908             -           -        251,908        264,040        12,132
 5.9 Child Health Benefit                           24,810             -           -          24,810        24,079          (731)
 5.10 Adult Health Benefit                         214,098             -           -        214,098        226,620        12,522
 5.11 Alberta Aids to Daily Living                 207,354             -           -        207,354        197,562        (9,792)
 5.12 Pharmaceutical Innovation and Management     140,371             -           -        140,371        197,812        57,441
                                                 2,430,404             -           -    2,430,404      2,564,493         134,089
 6    Emergency Medical Services
 6.1 Program Support                                 1,469             -           -           1,469         1,192          (277)
 6.2 Emergency Medical Services Initiatives         89,600             -           -          89,600        59,346       (30,254)
                                                    91,069             -           -          91,069        60,538       (30,531)
 7    Primary Health Care
 7.1 Program Support                                 3,594             -           -           3,594         3,964          370
 7.2 Primary Health Care                           319,048        63,700           -        382,748        284,082       (98,666)
                                                   322,642        63,700           -        386,342        288,046       (98,296)




154                                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                       Financial Information



Department of Health


Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited) (continued)

Year ended March 31, 2024
(in thousands)

                                                                                           Adjusted                          Over
Expense Vote by Program                       Voted        Supplementary Adjustments        Voted           Voted          Expended/
Operating Expense                           Estimate (1)    Estimate (2)      (3)
                                                                                           Estimate        Actuals (4)   (Unexpended)


8    Population and Public Health
8.1 Program Support                         $    21,215    $          -   $       -    $      21,215   $       18,695    $     (2,520)
8.2 Immunization Support                          4,121               -           -            4,121             2,170         (1,951)
8.3 Community-Based Health Services             122,467               -           -          122,467          107,748         (14,719)
8.4 Research and Support Programs                18,848               -           -           18,848           17,411          (1,437)
8.5 Palliative Care                               5,000               -           -            5,000             6,250         1,250
8.6 Children's Health Supports                   15,000               -           -           15,000           15,000                 -
8.7 Health Innovation                            17,500               -           -           17,500             7,500        (10,000)
8.8 Health System Projects                        1,900               -           -            1,900               407         (1,493)
8.9 Health Quality Council of Alberta             7,672               -           -            7,672            7,672               -
                                                213,723               -           -          213,723          182,853         (30,870)

9    Allied Health Services                     153,226               -           -          153,226          162,502          9,276

10   Human Tissue and Blood Services            254,522               -           -          254,522          256,925          2,403

11   Continuing Care
11.1 Program Support                              9,672               -           -            9,672             7,219         (2,453)
11.2 Continuing Care Programs                    26,402          69,400           -           95,802           81,387         (14,415)
11.3 Accomodation Standards and Licensing         5,757               -           -            5,757            4,334          (1,423)
                                                 41,831          69,400           -          111,231           92,940         (18,291)
12   Out-of-Province Health Care Services
12.1 Program Support                             16,614               -           -           16,614             8,008         (8,606)
12.2 Out-of-Province Health Care Services       139,986               -           -          139,986          143,335           3,349
                                                156,600               -           -          156,600          151,343          (5,257)
13   Information Technology
13.1 Program Support                              7,149               -           -            7,149             7,029             (120)
13.2 Development and Operations                 125,036               -           -          125,036           97,188         (27,848)
                                                132,185               -           -          132,185          104,217         (27,968)
14   Cancer Research and
       Prevention Investment                     25,850               -           -           25,850           26,848               998




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                             155
Financial Information



Department of Health


Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited) (continued)

Year ended March 31, 2024
(in thousands)

                                                                                                         Adjusted                                 Over
Expense Vote by Program                             Voted            Supplementary Adjustments            Voted              Voted              Expended/
                                                  Estimate (1)        Estimate (2)      (3)
                                                                                                         Estimate           Actuals (4)       (Unexpended)
Capital Grants
8    Population and Public Health
8.1 Program Support                           $                  -   $            -   $          -   $              -   $             83      $              83
15 Infrastructure Support
15.1 Continuing Care Beds                               89,452                -              -               89,452               1,162            (88,290)
                                                        89,452                    -              -           89,452               1,245            (88,207)
Capital Payments to Related Parties
3    Health System Capacity                             10,730                -              -               10,730              10,730                  -

8   Population and Public Health
8.3 Community-Based Health Services                        -                  -              -                  -                20,064            20,064

15 Infrastructure Support
15.2 External Information Systems
      Development                                        5,748                -              -                5,748               3,005             (2,743)
15.3 Medical Equipment Replacement
      and Upgrade Program                               30,000                -              -               30,000              30,000                 -
15.4 Alberta Surgical Initiative                        12,072                -              -               12,072              20,072             8,000
      Capital Program
15.5 Rural Alberta Health Facilities
      Capital Program                                   40,000                -              -               40,000              40,000                       -
15.6 National Association of Pharmacy
     Regulatory Authorities Capital Program             15,069                -              -               15,069              14,000             (1,069)
15.7 Emergency Medical Services Vehicles
      Capital Program                                   5,000                 -              -               5,000                5,000                 -
15.8 Beaverlodge Health Centre Replacement                -                   -              -                 -                  1,000             1,000
                                                      118,619                     -              -         118,619              143,871            25,252


Total                                         $ 25,037,760           $    133,100 $       (4,458) $ 25,166,402          $ 25,125,847          $    (40,555)
Credit or Recovery (Shortfall)                                   -            -           (1,000)            (1,000)                      -         1,000
                                              $ 25,037,760           $    133,100     $   (5,458) $ 25,165,402          $ 25,125,847          $    (39,555)
(Lapse)/Encumbrance                                                                                                                           $    (39,555)




156                                                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                                                      Financial Information



Department of Health


Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited) (continued)

Year ended March 31, 2024
(in thousands)
                                                                                                    Adjusted                               Over
Expense Vote by Program                               Voted      SupplementaryAdjustments            Voted             Voted             Expended/
                                                    Estimate (1)  Estimate (2)     (3)
                                                                                                    Estimate         Actuals (4)       (Unexpended)
Capital Investment Vote by Program
Department Capital Acquisitions
1 Ministry Support Services
1.3 Strategic Corporate Support                    $             -   $           -   $        - $              - $           446 $                446
8 Population and Public Health
8.8 Health System Projects                                   -               -            -               -                  579                  579
11 Continuing Care
11 Program Support                                          585              -            -               585                      -          (585)
13 Information Technology
13 Development and Operations                            27,280              -            -            27,280             13,483           (13,797)
15 Infrastructure Support
15.8 Beaverlodge Health Centre Replacement                1,000              -            -             1,000                  -            (1,000)
Total                                              $     28,865      $       -       $    -     $      28,865    $        14,508 $         (14,357)
(Lapse)/Encumbrance                                                                                                              $         (14,357)
Financial Transactions Vote by Program
Inventory Acquisition
5 Drugs and Supplemental Health Benefits
5.3 Outpatient Specialized High Cost Drugs          $       9,000 $          -     $      -   $       9,000 $         6,652 $          (2,348)
8 Population and Public Health
8.2       Immunization Support                             79,876            -            -         79,876           77,871            (2,005)
Total                                               $      88,876 $          -     $      -   $     88,876 $         84,523 $          (4,353)
(Lapse)/Encumbrance                                                                                                             $      (4,353)
Contingency Vote by Program
2 Alberta Health Services
2.4 Acute Care                                      $         -   $          -     $ 183,491 $ 183,491 $ 183,491 $                        -
4 Physician Compensation and Development
4.2 Physician Services                                        -              -       232,000       232,000          232,000               -
Total                                               $         -   $          -     $ 415,491 $ 415,491 $ 415,491 $                        -
(Lapse)/Encumbrance                                                                                                              $        -
  (1)
      As per "Expense Vote by Program", "Capital Investment Vote by Program" and "Financial Transactions Vote by Program" page 110 to
      114 of 2023-2024 Government Estimates.
  (2) Per the Supplementary Supply Estimates approved on March 21, 2024.
  (3)
      Adjustments include encumbrances, capital carry over amounts, transfers between votes, credit or recovery increases approved by
      Treasury Board, and credit or recovery shortfalls. An encumbrance is incurred when, on a vote by vote basis, the total of actual
      disbursements in the prior year exceed the total adjusted estimate. All calculated encumbrances from the prior year are reflected as
      an adjustment to reduce the corresponding voted estimate in the current year.
 (4)   Actuals exclude non-voted amounts such as amortization, inventory consumption, and valuation adjustments as no cash
       disbursement is required (non-cash amounts), or because the Legislative Assembly has already provided the funding authority
       pursuant to a statute other than an appropriation act.




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                                                             157
Financial Information



Department of Health


Statement of Remissions, Compromises and Write-offs (unaudited)

Year ended March 31, 2024
(in thousands)
                                                                             2024                   2023
Write-Offs
     Medical Claim Recoveries                                            $     2,900           $      2,294
     Pharmaceuticals and Health Benefits                                       3,220                    -
     Other Receivables                                                           498                  3,346
Total Write-offs (1)                                                     $     6,618           $      5,640
(1)
      There were no remissions or compromises during the year.

The above statement has been prepared pursuant to Section 23 of the Financial Administration Act . The
statement includes all remissions, compromises and write-offs made or approved during the fiscal year.




Payments Based on Agreements (unaudited)

The following has been prepared pursuant to Section 25(3) of the Financial Administration Act.

The Department entered into agreements, under the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan, with other
Provincial and Territorial Governments to provide health services on their behalf. The Department pays
service providers for services rendered under the agreements and recovers the amount paid. Service
providers include Alberta Health Services and physicians. The Department merely provides a service for
another party and assumes no liability beyond that of completely discharging the role of being a conduit
for funding. Costs based on these agreements are incurred by the Department under authority in Section
25 of the Financial Administration Act. Accounts receivable includes $56,750 (2023 - $50,032) relating to
payments based on agreements.


Amounts paid based on agreements are as follows:




                                                                             2024                  2023
      Other Provincial and Territorial Governments                      $    344,034       $       301,047




158                                                                           Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
                                                                                      Financial Information



Ministry of Health
Year ended March 31, 2024
(in thousands)

Trust Funds under Administration (unaudited)
Trust funds under administration are funds consisting of public money over which the Legislature has no
power of appropriation. Because the Ministry has no equity in the funds and administers them for the
purposes of various trusts, they are not included in the consolidated financial statements.

As at March 31, 2024, the balance reported for Health Benefit Trust of Alberta was $208,949 (2023 -
$90,991) and other trust funds for research and development, education, and other programs was
$2,185 (2023 - $1,955).

The Ministry and a third-party trustee administer the Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan in
accordance with a retirement compensation arrangement trust agreement. As at March 31, 2024, there
are $25,176 in plan assets (2023 - $26,547).




Health | Annual Report 2023–2024                                                                       159
Financial Information




Annual Report Extracts and Other Statutory Reports
Public Interest Disclosure (Whistleblower Protection) Act

Section 32 of the Public Interest Disclosure (Whistleblower Protection) Act reads:

32(1) Every chief officer must prepare a report annually on all disclosures that have been made to
      the designated officer of the department, public entity or office of the Legislature for which
      the chief officer is responsible.
  (2) The report under subsection (1) must include the following information:
      (a) the number of disclosures received by the designated officer, the number of disclosures
          acted on and the number of disclosures not acted on by the designated officer;
      (b) the number of investigations commenced by the designated officer as a result of
          disclosures;
      (c) in the case of an investigation that results in a finding of wrongdoing, a description of
          the wrongdoing and any recommendations made or corrective measures taken in
          relation to the wrongdoing or the reasons why no corrective measure was taken.
  (3) The report under subsection (1) must be included in the annual report of the department,
      public entity or office of the Legislature if the annual report is made publicly available.

There were no disclosures of wrongdoing filed with my office for your department between
April 1, 2023 and March 31, 2024.

Note: Alberta Health Services and the Health Quality Council of Alberta are considered separate
entities for the purposes of the Act, and therefore have individual reporting obligations.




160                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2023–2024
