Health
Annual Report 2018  – 2019
Note to Readers:
Copies of the annual report are available on the Alberta Open Government Portal website www.alberta.ca


Ministry of Health

Communications
PO Box 1360, Station Main                             Phone: 780-638-3225
Edmonton, AB T5J 1 S6                                 Fax:   780-427-1171

ISBN: 978-1-4601-4391-9 (Print)
ISBN: 978-1-4601-4392-6 (PDF online)
ISSN: 2367-9816 (Print)
ISSN: 2367-9824 (PDF online)



Copyright © 2019 President of Treasury Board and Minister of Finance and its licensors. All rights reserved
Table of Contents
Preface ..............................................................................................................................................     3

Message from the Minister ..............................................................................................................                   4

Message from the Associate Minister............................................................................................                            5

Management’s Responsibility for Reporting.................................................................................                                 6

Results Analysis ..............................................................................................................................            7
      Ministry Overview ......................................................................................................................             8
      Discussion and Analysis of Results ........................................................................................                         12
            Outcome One: Improved health outcomes for all Albertans .................................................                                     12
            Outcome Two: The well-being of Albertans is supported through population
            health initiatives .....................................................................................................................      18
            Outcome Three: Albertans receive care from highly skilled health care providers
            and teams, working to their full scope of practice .................................................................                          25
            Outcome Four: A high quality, stable, accountable and sustainable health system ............                                                  29
      Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology ................................................................                                      34

Financial Information .......................................................................................................................             47
      Ministry Financial Highlights....................................................................................................                   48
            Statement of Revenues and Expenses (unaudited) .............................................................                                  49
            Revenue and Expense Highlights .........................................................................................                     50
            Expenses – Directly Incurred Detailed by Object (unaudited) ..............................................                                    53
      Supplemental Financial Information........................................................................................                          55
            Tangible Capital Assets (unaudited) .....................................................................................                     55
            Portfolio Investments (unaudited) .........................................................................................                   56
      Financial Statements of Other Reporting Entities .................................................................                                  57
            Alberta Health Services.........................................................................................................              59
            Health Quality Council of Alberta ..........................................................................................                 107

Other Financial Information ............................................................................................................                 129
            Department of Health ............................................................................................................            130
            Ministry of Health ..................................................................................................................        136

Annual Report Extracts and Other Statutory Reports .................................................................                                     137
Introduction




2              Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                Introduction




Preface
The Public Accounts of Alberta are prepared in accordance with the Financial Administration Act and the
Fiscal Planning and Transparency Act. The Public Accounts consist of the annual report of the
Government of Alberta and the annual reports of each of the 21 ministries.

The annual report of the Government of Alberta contains the consolidated financial statements of the
province and Measuring Up report, which compares actual performance results to desired results set out
in the government’s strategic plan.

This annual report of the Ministry of Health contains the financial information of the ministry and a
comparison of actual performance results to desired results set out in the ministry business plan.
This ministry annual report also includes:

• the financial statements of entities making up the ministry including Department of Health,
   Alberta Health Services, and the Health Quality Council of Alberta, for which the minister is
   responsible;
• other financial information as required by the Financial Administration Act and Fiscal Planning
   and Transparency Act, as separate reports, to the extent that the ministry has anything to
   report.
In December 2018, government announced changes to the 2018-19 ministry annual reports. Ministry and
department audited financial statements previously included in the annual report of the Ministry of Health
have been replaced with the financial information of the ministry on pages 47-56.

Key information previously contained in the annual reports of each of the 21 ministries is now included in
the audited consolidated financial statements of the province.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                             3
Introduction




Message from the Minister
                                 Serving Albertans as the province’s Minister of Health is an honour I was
                                 given this spring. My role will be to help ensure the overall design and
                                 strategic direction of Alberta’s health system is responsive and
                                 sustainable for many years to come.

                                 Since I took on this role on April 30, 2019, I have been learning about the
                                 results of the ministry for the 2018-19 fiscal year. Many of the
                                 achievements can be credited to the dedication of the health care
                                 professionals who work tirelessly to provide world-class care to
                                 Albertans.

                                 As the Health Minister, I am committed to making the system even better
by ensuring patients are at the centre of it. I look forward to working with Alberta Health Services to
reduce wait times and ensure all Albertans have access to a publicly-funded, universal and reliable health
care system.

Collaboration is essential to meeting the challenges of building a world-class health care system. I want to
recognize the ongoing contributions of the many hard-working staff at the Ministry of Health and Alberta
Health Services, as well as the work of our many partner organizations.

I look forward to our continued work together to build an outstanding health care system in Alberta.


[Original signed by]


Honourable Tyler Shandro
Minister of Health




4                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                  Introduction




Message from the Associate Minister
                                   It is my pleasure to work with Minister Shandro and staff across the
                                   health system to improve mental health and addiction recovery
                                   outcomes for all Albertans. As Associate Minister for mental health and
                                   addiction, I am pleased to work toward improving access to a full
                                   continuum of high quality care.

                                   Our Government is responding to the severity of the current addiction
                                   crisis. This response is bringing attention and resources to this
                                   important public health issue by helping to keep people alive and
                                   working with all parties and viewpoints to build a better, safer and more
                                   effective system for the future.

                                While we work hard to help the most at risk and keep communities safe,
we must remind ourselves that success in helping people to achieve recovery is not only possible but is
desirable and within reach.

Alberta is home to some of the best, most qualified counselling, treatment, harm reduction and recovery
centres in Canada. It’s time to cheer them on.


[Original signed by]


Honourable Jason Luan
Associate Minister of Mental Health and Addictions




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                               5
Introduction




Management’s Responsibility for Reporting
The Ministry of Health includes the Department of Health, Alberta Health Services and the Health Quality
Council of Alberta. The executives of the individual entities within the ministry have the primary
responsibility and accountability for the respective entities. Collectively, the executives ensure the ministry
complies with all relevant legislation, regulations and policies.

Ministry business plans, annual reports, performance results and the supporting management information
are integral to the government’s fiscal and strategic plan, annual report, quarterly reports and other
financial and performance reporting.

Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the consolidated financial statements and performance
results for the ministry rests with the Minister of Health. Under the direction of the Minister, we oversee
the preparation of the ministry’s annual report, including consolidated financial statements and
performance results. The consolidated financial statements and the performance results, of necessity,
include amounts that are based on estimates and judgments. The financial information is prepared using
the government’s stated accounting policies, which are based on Canadian public sector accounting
standards. The performance measures are prepared in accordance with the following criteria:
• Reliability – Information used in applying performance measure methodologies agrees with the
   underlying source data for the current and prior years’ results.
• Understandability – the performance measure methodologies and results are presented clearly.
• Comparability – the methodologies for performance measure preparation are applied consistently for
   the current and prior years’ results.
• Completeness – outcomes, performance measures and related targets match those included in the
   ministry’s Budget 2018.
As deputy minister, in addition to program responsibilities, I am responsible for the ministry’s financial
administration and reporting functions. The ministry maintains systems of financial management and
internal control which give consideration to costs, benefits, and risks that are designed to:
• provide reasonable assurance that transactions are properly authorized, executed in accordance with
    prescribed legislation and regulations, and properly recorded so as to maintain accountability of public
    money;
• provide information to manage and report on performance;
• safeguard the assets and properties of the province under ministry administration;
• provide Executive Council, the President of Treasury Board and Minister of Finance, and the Minister
    of Health the information needed to fulfill their responsibilities; and
• facilitate preparation of ministry business plans and annual reports required under the Fiscal Planning
    and Transparency Act.
In fulfilling my responsibilities for the ministry, I have relied, as necessary, on the executives of the
individual entities within the ministry.


[Original signed by]


Lorna Rosen
Deputy Minister of Health
June 7, 2019



6                                                                                 Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                                                       Results Analysis




Results Analysis

Table of Contents

    Ministry Overview ......................................................................................................................         8
    Discussion and Analysis of Results ........................................................................................                     12
         Outcome One: Improved health outcomes for all Albertans ................................................                                   12
         Outcome Two: The well-being of Albertans is supported through population
         health initiatives .....................................................................................................................   18
         Outcome Three: Albertans receive care from highly skilled health care providers
         and teams, working to their full scope of practice .................................................................                       25
         Outcome Four: A high quality, stable, accountable and sustainable health system ...........                                                29
    Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology ................................................................                                  34




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                                                     7
Results Analysis




Ministry Overview
Organizational Structure
The Minister of Health is responsible for setting strategic policy, directing legislation and overseeing the
health system to ensure the health of Albertans is protected, resources are aligned with the goals of the
government, and public dollars are used appropriately. The ministry consists of:

• Department of Health
• Alberta Health Services (AHS) – which is the provincial health authority responsible for delivery of a
    substantial portion of health care services across the province
• The Health Quality Council of Alberta (HQCA) – which is a legislated council responsible for
    monitoring health service quality and patient safety


Department of Health

The Department of Health implements the Government of Alberta’s vision and strategic direction for
health and is responsible for the overall design, strategic policy direction, legislation, and monitoring of
the health system’s quality and performance. In this role the department ensures the health system is
delivering quality in terms of health outcomes, including patient experience, and value for public
investment. Core functions include advising the minister and government on health policy, assuring
quality, supporting capital infrastructure, enabling policy implementation, funding the health system, and
carrying out general health system oversight.

With direction from the minister, the deputy minister is responsible for the daily operations of the
Department of Health, which is structured as follows:

Deputy Minister's Office – provides leadership to the health system to ensure quality health services,
drive innovation, and continue to build and maintain collaborative relationships with partners across
government ministries, AHS, and stakeholder organizations. The office provides policy coordination and
issues management for the Minister as well as leadership in priority-setting, decision-making, and
operations of the ministry.

Financial and Corporate Services Division – forecasts and manages the ministry’s budget, funds and
monitors the financial activities of the department, provides financial advice and prepares annual financial
statements, ensuring compliance with Government of Alberta financial legislation. The division oversees
capital planning, including health facilities planning and coordinates infrastructure projects with Ministry of
Infrastructure and AHS. The division works with Health Service Delivery division to deliver continuing care
capital grants and monitor the number of new continuing care spaces. The division also manages
registration, designation and bed survey processes and reporting. The division coordinates the grant
approval process for the department. The division also provides general administrative and contracting-
based corporate services to enable the department to fulfil its mandate, as well as recovery of the cost of
health services from liable third parties where appropriate.

Public Health and Compliance Division – provides strategic direction and leadership through the
assessment, development and implementation of provincial policies, regulations, strategies, and
standards in response to the opioid and other emerging public health crises, communicable diseases,



8                                                                               Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                            Results Analysis



immunization, compliance monitoring, environmental public health, health promotion, and emergency
preparedness, response and recovery. The division carries out these functions to support innovation and
engagement with Albertans in wellness, health promotion, harm reduction, opioid use disorder treatment,
as well as injury and disease prevention. To support health system quality, the division collaborates with
partners in compliance and monitoring activities and enforcement of the acts, regulations and standards
administered by the division regarding physician billing, continuing care accommodations and health
services, infection prevention and control, and protection for persons in care.

Health Information Systems Division – manages the administration of Alberta’s Health Information Act,
including health information policy and advice, as well as the strategic planning and delivery of
information management and technology systems. The division also provides provincial governance of
health information management; develops and implements legislative requirements, policy and best
practice information related to the secure exchange of health information; delivers information technology
solutions to support ministry operations and the provincial e-health environment; and stewards the
provincial programs of Alberta Netcare, the province’s electronic health record and MyHealth Records,
the online personal health record for Albertans.

Innovation and Strategic Operations Division – manages and facilitates the corporate processes that
develop and deliver the ministry’s strategic priorities and establishes evidence-informed, high-value
innovation in policy and practice in the health care system. The division’s responsibilities include
leadership and coordination of the ministry’s strategic policy, corporate planning and reporting,
Indigenous health policy, strategic support on federal/provincial/territorial health issues, AHS
accountability, governance of health sector public bodies, coordination and support of health care
research and innovation, ministry correspondence services, and the ministry’s response to applications
under Alberta’s Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act.

Health Workforce Planning and Accountability Division – develops and implements health workforce
policies, regulations, compensation strategies and governance models to enable a health workforce that
meets Albertans’ needs. The division collaborates with stakeholders, including physicians, professional
colleges and associations, and other internal and external partners, to design and administer evidence-
informed, value-oriented policies and health benefits that serve the needs of all Albertans.

Pharmaceutical and Supplementary Benefits Division – provides governance to, and oversees the
administration of, the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan, remuneration systems and claims processing
for physicians and allied health professionals, and interprovincial reciprocal financial arrangements. The
division designs and delivers community-based supplementary health benefit programs on behalf of
Albertans requiring pharmaceutical, chiropractic, optical, dental, and other medical supports (wheelchairs,
prosthetics, oxygen, medical/surgical supplies, etc.). These supplementary health benefit programs
include premium-free prescribed drugs and other benefits to seniors as well as pharmacist-administered
vaccinations. The division also provides leadership to national and provincial organizations to ensure
accountable and appropriate delivery of blood, organ and tissue donation, dialysis and other provincial
clinical services. Through leading engagement with cross-Canada working groups under the direction of
the Interprovincial Health Insurance Agreements Coordinating Committee, the division examines the state
of interprovincial health coverage to increase access and reduce barriers.

Health Standards, Quality and Performance Division – provides leadership for monitoring, assessing,
and improving health system performance. The division is the primary source for Alberta’s overall health
system data standards and analytics, evaluating the health system’s performance to support evidence-
based policy decisions for all health sectors: primary health care, acute and emergency care, continuing



Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                             9
Results Analysis



care, addiction and mental health, public health, and pharmaceuticals. It is the ministry’s core strategic
economic team developing and producing economic evaluations, predictive models,
financial forecasts and value for money analyses.

The division is also responsible for ensuring acute and ambulatory care service planning, including
transitions in models of care. Decisions are based on clinical evidence, integrate planning with other
health care sectors, and ensure health delivery and capital investment are aligned with government policy
direction. To improve existing acute and ambulatory care services, the division drives improvements
through clinical appropriateness initiatives in collaboration with health care delivery partners,
the Health Quality Council of Alberta and the College of Physicians and Surgeons, to ensure a safe and
high quality health system.

Health Service Delivery Division – is responsible for providing leadership and strategic direction,
including the development and implementation of policy, legislation and standards, as well as ongoing
monitoring for continuing care, addiction and mental health, and emergency health services. The division
is also responsible for working with government, service providers and community partners to promote a
coordinated, integrated community-based health care system for Albertans. The division works closely
with other social ministries, external organizations, partners, other Canadian provinces and the federal
government to plan health service delivery.

Office of the Chief Medical Officer of Health – provides leadership and public health expertise on all
issues of public health importance such as health surveillance, population health, injury or disease control
initiatives and opioid emergency response. This includes taking necessary measures to respond to health
crises and to new and emerging pathogens, control and intervention programs to limit the spread of
communicable diseases, infection prevention and control measures, and health risk assessments. The
Chief Medical Officer of Health has overarching legislated responsibilities for monitoring and reporting on
the health of Albertans and intervening to protect and promote the health of the public under authority of
the Public Health Act. This is accomplished by supporting and sometimes leading the development of
healthy public policy and fulfilling the obligations of the Act.

Communications – provides Albertans and health system partners with information about ministry
policies, programs, and initiatives. The branch works with department staff to develop and implement
communications plans and offers communications support, such as media relations, issues management,
writing and editing services, product development, and online communications services. The branch also
works closely with AHS and other reporting entities to coordinate ministry communications.

Human Resources – is dedicated to supporting initiatives, delivering programs, and providing human
resource expertise and services that attract, retain, and engage the department’s workforce. The branch
works in partnership with managers and employees to build and sustain workforce capacity to achieve
business goals and create an environment where employees are respected, valued, engaged and
resilient.

Corporate Counsel – through Alberta Justice and Solicitor General, Corporate Counsel leads a team of
lawyers that supports all aspects of the department activities ranging from contracting and procurement,
to developing and interpreting legislation and general legal advice to the ministry.

Office of the Alberta Health Advocates – includes the Health Advocate and the Mental Health Patient
Advocate. The office supports Albertans in resolving their health-related concerns by helping them
navigate the health care system; referring individuals to the appropriate complaints resolution services;



10                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                             Results Analysis



providing information about the Alberta Health Charter; requesting the inspection of provincial health care
facilities; and, addressing patients’ issues and concerns in relation to the Mental Health Act.

Key Factors Influencing Performance
Alberta’s population continues to grow and change, placing increasing demands on provincial health
services, health providers and physical infrastructure. Creative solutions, innovative partnerships,
disciplined and integrated system planning, and strong fiscal stewardship are needed to help meet these
demands.

Public expectations and lifestyle also play a key role in a high functioning health system. Governments,
communities and individuals all have a part in addressing the social, economic and environmental
determinants of health, which means a coordinated approach is needed to support Albertans in managing
their health and making healthy lifestyle choices. This is even more important in the face of the province’s
growing and aging population.

Also important is having stable, secure information management and information technology systems and
comprehensive data analysis, all of which are crucial to optimizing services, patient care, and health
system outcomes. New technologies, including those in health information and biological and data
science, will lead to new approaches and discoveries that could be significant for the future of more
integrated and efficient health care.

Finally, one of the biggest key factors that influences success is health system cost drivers. These
drivers, combined with external economic pressures that influence government revenue require active
management of budget targets and innovative solutions to support long-term sustainability.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                          11
Results Analysis




Discussion and Analysis of Results
In 2018-19 the Ministry of Health’s four overarching outcomes were:

         •   Outcome One: Improved health outcomes for all Albertans
         •   Outcome Two: The well-being of Albertans is supported through population health initiatives
         •   Outcome Three: Albertans receive care from highly skilled health care providers and teams, working
             to their full scope of practice
         •   Outcome Four: A high quality, stable, accountable and sustainable health system



Outcome One: Improved health outcomes for all Albertans
Outcome statement |
Albertans’ health and well-being is improved through an integrated health care system that is person-
centred and structured around individuals, families, and communities. Seamless services across the
continuum of care support individuals throughout their lives, ensuring every Albertan has access to
appropriate services that are close to home.


Key Strategies

1.1   Expand home care services to increase access to health services, reduce reliance on acute
      care facilities, and enable Albertans to stay at home longer.

Home care services include professional health care, personal care and home supports to Albertans as
well as respite for their caregivers. Clients may require services only for a short time or on an ongoing
basis.

In 2018-19, rural home care staff and service hours were increased, as were supports for caregivers and
the number of adult day program spaces. Additional resources strengthened management and in-home
support for clients recently discharged from hospital. Team-based care for clients with complex needs,
palliative and end-of-life care were also increased.

A bi-lateral transfer agreement was also signed with Health Canada for $703 million in federal funding
over 10 years to support home care enhancements.

1.2   Develop a targeted approach for new continuing care spaces and upgrading or replacing
      existing sites, focusing on complex populations and communities in greatest need.

In 2018-19, Alberta Health Services (AHS) issued a Request for Proposal for continuing care spaces that
do not need capital funding. The process will create almost 1,000 spaces. The ministry also commits to
funding 37 Indigenous communities and organizations to help them identify the continuing care needs in
their communities.




12                                                                                Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                             Results Analysis



1.3   Enhance care for persons with dementia so they receive timely diagnosis and support in
      their communities with accessible, integrated and high-quality care and services.

As of April 1, 2018, there were more than 45,800 Albertans diagnosed and living with dementia –
including 4,435 aged 40-65 years; 21,410 aged 65-84 years; and 19,960 aged 85 or older. This diagnosis
has a significant impact on those living with dementia as well as on their families, friends, caregivers and
communities.

In 2018-19, the ministry allocated $2.2 million to implement the Alberta Dementia Strategy and Action
Plan. The plan addresses dementia as a larger societal issue, and one that government, communities
and Albertans must work together to address. The $2.2 million investment is helping community partners
develop programs and services that reduce stigma, change attitudes and behaviours, improve individuals’
independence, and enhance quality of life and well-being. The First Link program delivered by the
Alzheimer Society of Alberta and Northwest Territories is an example of the type of program needed to
support individuals living with dementia and their caregivers. A progress report was released in
March 2019, in which outcomes for supporting Albertans impacted by dementia were identified.

1.4   Implement the Valuing Mental Health: Next Steps to move toward a more coordinated and
      integrated addiction and mental health system.

In 2018-19, the ministry worked with health and community partners to strengthen addiction and mental
health care for Albertans.

Low-income and homeless Calgarians seeking primary and mental health services from the Calgary
Urban Partnership Society no longer face a wait list due to $1.4 million in ministry funding. Alberta
Community and Social Services’ funded addiction and mental health supports for homeless people
through community-based organizations who implement the Housing First initiative in urban centres.

Mental Health First Aid training was delivered to 200 government staff working in disability services, as
well as 250 seniors and their caregivers.

Schools hired staff to provide additional school-based community mental health supports, using ministry
grant funding of $5 million. These additional staff will also act as links to additional mental health
resources in the health care system.

1.5   Implement a system-wide response to chronic conditions and disease prevention and
      management by aligning and integrating work across the province.

With a growing number of Albertans living with chronic conditions and diseases such as cancer, health
services and supports (including prevention initiatives) need to be integrated and coordinated within and
beyond the health care system.

In 2018-19, the Alberta Cancer Prevention Legacy Fund provided approximately $10 million in funding for
14 projects, including 12 projects led by AHS and two projects led by community organizations.
AHS projects included a Healthier Together Workplaces website, and nurse and oncology navigators to
help cancer patients navigate through the health system.

The 41 Primary Care Networks (PCNs) in Alberta have each identified initiatives related to chronic
conditions and disease prevention and management.



Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                            13
Results Analysis



Performance Measures and Indicators
Performance Measure 1.a
     Access to continuing care: Percentage of clients placed in continuing care within 30 days of
     being assessed


                              Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                              2018-19               2018-19
      2014-15               2015-16                2016-17              2017-18                Result               Target
       Result                Result                Result                Result
        60%                   60%                    56%                   52%                  58%                   58%
Source: Alberta Health Services. Data are extracted from Meditech and Stratahealth Pathways.


This measure is used to monitor and report on access to continuing care living options (designated
supportive living or long-term care) in Alberta, as indicated by the proportion of individuals waiting
30 days or less for a move into a continuing care option. Timely access to a continuing care facility as
soon as possible after being assessed, supports the health and well-being of both the client and their
family.

Results Analysis

The current result of 58 per cent shows that the increase in the number of facility-based continuing care
spaces and the enhancements made to home care in the past few years are starting to achieve the
planned improvement in the percentage of clients who are moved into facility-based continuing care
within 30 days of being assessed. AHS tracks results on a monthly basis and there are indications that
the results began to show improvement as early as late 2017 and have continued to improve across
2018-19, however there is need for the investments made in home and community care to mature and for
the addition of facility-based spaces in continuing care to continue, as planned.

Performance Measure 1.b
     Percentage of mental health patients with unplanned readmissions within 30 days of leaving
     hospital


                              Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                             Current               2018-19
      2014-15               2015-16                2016-17              2017-18              Result                Target
       Result                Result                Result                Result
        8.8%                  8.6%                   8.8%                 8.8%                 9.8%1                 8.6%
Source: Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI); Alberta Health Services, Provincial Inpatient Database (DAD).
1
 Q3 year-to-date.


This measure represents the proportion of occurrences of a non-elective (unplanned) readmission to an
acute care hospital for selected mental illness within 30 days of a patient being discharged from the
hospital stay for their mental illness. The measure applies only to inpatients of acute care hospitals in
Alberta. Visits to facilities and programs not designated as acute inpatient care facilities (e.g., hospital
emergency departments, urgent care centres, community clinics) are not included. The selected mental




14                                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                              Results Analysis



illnesses included are substance use disorders; schizophrenia, delusional, and non-organic psychotic
disorders; mood/affective disorders; anxiety disorders; and disorders of adult personality and behavior.

Results Analysis

The preliminary result for 2018-19 of 9.8 per cent is above the target of 8.6 per cent. Alberta’s results
were rather consistent in the four years prior to this result, with continued efforts underway to achieve the
target.

Although readmission may involve external factors, high rates of readmission act as a signal to hospital
clinicians to look more carefully at their practices, including discharge planning and continuity of services
after discharge. Rates may also be impacted due to the nature of the population served by a facility
(e.g., patients with complex health needs) or by accessibility of mental health care in the community.

Performance Indicator 1.a
     Emergency visits due to substance use (per 100,000 population)


                                                   Prior Years’ Results1
                                                                                                                   2018
    Substance
                              2014                 2015                  2016                 2017                Result
                             Result               Result                Result               Result
      Alcohol                  945                  957                  961                   946                  935
      Opioids                  108                  142                  175                   205                  219
Sources: Alberta Ambulatory Care database; Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan, Mid-year adjusted Population Registry Files
Statistics Canada; Canadian population, 2011.
1
 2014-2017 results have been updated.


This indicator provides the age-standardized rate of visits to emergency departments and urgent care
centres related to use of alcohol and opioids.

Results Analysis

The results show that the number of emergency visits due to psychoactive substances has risen steadily
over the past five years. The largest increase has been in visits due to opioid use. Substance use is a
growing problem in Alberta, while alcohol use remains steady.

Steps taken by the ministry to reduce the harms associated with opioid use may increase emergency
visits. For example, naloxone availability and increased awareness of how to respond to opioid overdoses
may lead to an increase in individuals being brought to emergency departments for follow-up.

The ministry continues to be involved in supporting responsible alcohol consumption as co-chair of the
National Alcohol Strategy Advisory Committee. This work supports the pan-Canadian sharing of best
practices. AHS is working with municipalities to support and promote the development and
implementation of municipal policies that support responsible alcohol use. The department, AHS, and the
Alberta Gaming and Liquor Commission have all worked collaboratively to implement the
Alcohol Strategy.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                             15
Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 1.b
     Prevalence of cigarette smoking among Albertans (per cent)


                                                       Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                                                 Current
            Age
                                     2014               2015                2016               2017              Result
                                    Result             Result              Result             Result
        12-24 years                 14.7%1              9.8%                13.0%              15.1%         Not Available2
     25 years and older             19.8%1             20.4%                19.1%              17.1%         Not Available2
Source: Canadian Community Health Survey, Statistics Canada.
1
  Statistics Canada has warned against making comparisons prior to 2014 with the Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS)
conducted 2015 onwards. The daily smoker used was defined slightly differently compared to pre-2014. Therefore comparing these
estimates between 2013-2014 and 2015-2017 should be avoided or interpreted with caution.
2
  2018 data is currently unavailable from Statistics Canada. Results expected to be available in the fall of 2019.


The cigarette-smoking indicator is a self-reported measure among Albertans who completed the
Canadian Community Health Survey. Daily and occasional smokers are included in the estimate.

For 2015-2017, the cigarette-smoking indicator included the following self-reported responses:
a) current daily smoker and b) current occasional smoker.

For 2013-2014, the cigarette-smoking indicator included the following self-reported responses:
a) daily smoker, b) occasional smoker (former daily smoker), and c) always an occasional smoker.

Results Analysis

Cigarette smoking trends for Albertans 25 years and older have decreased (p-value<0.05) from
20.4 per cent (in 2015) to 17.1 per cent (in 2017). Among Albertans age 12-24, the smoking rate
increased from 2015 to 2017 (p-value<0.05). Without additional information, it is unclear whether the rise
in smoking rates for youth age 12-24 is a long-term trend that will require additional action to address or a
short-term anomaly. A rise in smoking rates amongst this age group may be related to an increase in
youth vaping and nicotine addiction over the same period of time.

The department continues to support AHS in offering tobacco cessation programs, tobacco prevention
and health promotion activities, and the toll-free Tobacco Quitline (AlbertaQuits).




16                                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                            Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 1.c
     Ambulatory care sensitive conditions: Hospitalization rate (per 100,000) for patients under
     75 years of age with conditions that could be prevented or reduced if they received
     appropriate care in an ambulatory setting


                                       Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                                                2018
          2014                       2015                      2016                   2017                    Result
         Result                     Result                    Result                 Result
          3781                       3611                       3621                   3491                     3402
Sources: Numerator: Alberta Health Services, Discharge Abstract Database (DAD); Denominator: Alberta Health Population
Estimate.
1
2014-2017 results have been updated. 22018 result is preliminary.


This indicator measures the number of people (under 75 years of age) per 100,000 population who were
hospitalized for health conditions that could have been treated in an ambulatory care setting. Ambulatory
care is provided outside of a hospital inpatient setting, such as in community clinics operated by AHS,
urgent care centres, and emergency departments. The health conditions, known as ambulatory care
sensitive conditions, include: grand mal status and other epileptic convulsions; chronic obstructive
pulmonary diseases; asthma; heart failure and pulmonary edema; hypertension; angina; and, diabetes.

Hospitalization for an ambulatory care sensitive condition is considered an indicator of lack of access to
appropriate primary health care. While not all admissions for these conditions are avoidable, it is
assumed that appropriate ambulatory care could prevent the onset of this type of illness or condition,
control an acute episodic illness or condition, or manage a chronic disease or condition.

Results Analysis

There has been consistent improvement in this indicator as shown by the declining hospitalization rate
over the past five years for patients with ambulatory care sensitive conditions. This result suggests
Albertans may be accessing more appropriate primary health care options, as opposed to hospitals, to
address their needs.

Optimizing management of these health conditions in the community, including primary health care
settings can contribute to both improved patient outcomes and reduced health care costs.
The Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) ranked Alberta fifth out of 12 provinces and territories
for this health indicator in 2016-17. While additional work is needed to further reduce this rate, Alberta’s
trend is decreasing each year and community options are increasing.

The ministry continued to focus on increasing access to care in the community and developing a
coordinated approach across the continuum of care to help people prevent and manage chronic health
conditions and diseases and improve their quality of life. The department and AHS are working
collaboratively to coordinate the planning and delivery of supports and services with Albertans, patients,
care providers and community partners.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                         17
Results Analysis



Outcome Two: The well-being of Albertans is supported through
population health initiatives
Outcome statement |
Healthy populations and communities are shaped through a range of social, economic, and physical
environmental factors, also known as the determinants of health. The ministry works with its partners to
address health inequities and to encourage Albertans to stay healthy by developing policies, programs
and initiatives focused on prevention of injury and disease.


Key Strategies

2.1   Engage with community partners on wellness initiatives to enhance and support equitable
      approaches that enable Albertans to be active partners in the prevention and management
      of chronic disease.

Communities, schools and workplaces have a big impact on the health of Albertans. Strong partnerships
with diverse stakeholders are essential when it comes to preventing and managing chronic disease.

The ministry worked with community partners to promote healthy living, including with Indigenous
communities and other community partners to promote healthy eating and physical activity.

To help prevent negative health outcomes due to drug use, AHS launched a public awareness campaign
focused on drugs. The website www.drugsafe.ca provides information on opioids, fentanyl, and cannabis.

The Injury Prevention Centre received $1.3 million in funding from the ministry to provide research,
education, awareness and resources on topics like preventing falls, poisonings, concussions, and other
injury hazards. Other injury prevention initiatives were targeted to seniors to increase awareness of
injuries and to provide tools on strength and balance.

2.2   Engage with Indigenous communities and other organizations in the design and delivery of
      culturally appropriate health care services that address inequities in access and support
      improved health outcomes.

In 2018-19 the ministry continued to address health inequities and health service improvements for
Indigenous Albertans by collaborating with Indigenous communities, AHS, the federal government and
other partners to address heath priorities, and support culturally safe programs and services.

The ministry worked with AHS to adopt mandatory anti-racism and cultural sensitivity training for all staff
and physicians with a goal to have all employees trained by 2021. As of March 31, 2019, 15,716 AHS
employees completed the Awareness & Sensitivity program and 33,622 AHS employees completed the
Indigenous People in Alberta: An Introduction training module.

Significant gaps continue in the overall health status of Indigenous Albertans compared to
non-Indigenous Albertans. The ministry will continue to work with Indigenous communities to address
these gaps through funding and program support, including suicide prevention, mental health, opioid
response, and primary care. The ministry commits to funding 37 Indigenous communities and
organizations to help determine continuing care needs for their community.



18                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                               Results Analysis



2.3   Lead an urgent response to reduce harms associated with opioid use and oversee the
      implementation of priority activities to address overdoses and deaths related to fentanyl and
      other opioids.

The opioid crisis is having an enormous impact on family, friends and communities. Opioid use disorder
demands a public health response, which spans harm reduction services and treatment options.

Six new Supervised Consumption Services sites are now open, bringing the total to seven; and three
temporary overdose prevention sites were established. To further support harm reduction efforts, the
ministry also supported the distribution of more than 137,000 naloxone kits.

New opioid dependency treatment clinics were established in Fort McMurray, High Prairie and Bonnyville.
Two specialized clinics were also established in Edmonton and Calgary as pilot projects to treat people
with severe opioid use disorder, and $1.6 million in funding was provided to create up to 30 new intox
spaces in Lethbridge. The Virtual Opioid Dependency Program was also expanded in Lethbridge.

A bilateral agreement was also signed between the Government of Canada and the province to provide
$24 million from the federal Emergency Treatment Fund to create a program that covers the costs of
opioid agonist therapy medications for Albertans without health benefits, as well as expand access to
treatment in provincial correctional facilities.

2.4   Improve maternal, infant and child health by supporting initiatives that foster maternal-infant
      health and early childhood development.

Maternal-infant health initiatives foster healthy birth outcomes, including healthy birth weights, Fetal
Alcohol Spectrum Disorder prevention, and support for overall maternal and infant health.

To support infant health, the ministry expanded newborn metabolic screening for more conditions
including sickle cell disease and severe combined immunodeficiency. Screening for congenital hearing
loss was also expanded. The dTAP vaccine was made available to expectant mothers without cost, which
provides protection to newborns against pertussis (whooping cough).

2.5   Develop and implement evidence-based environmental public health policies and practices
      by addressing a range of public health protection issues in the natural and built
      environment

Environmental public health focuses on relationships between people and their environment, promotes
human health and well-being, fosters healthy and safe communities.

In 2018-19 the ministry implemented recommendations from technical air quality, odour and human
health assessments in the Peace and Fort McKay region. Work was completed in establishing emergency
air quality triggers, exercising new protocols to determine the source of air quality concerns, and
increased communication between key stakeholders.

Extensive collaboration with the Ministry of Environment and Parks and AHS to investigate contamination
on the former Domtar Wood Preservation Facility site in northeast Edmonton occurred throughout the
year. The ministry’s focus was to protect the health of residents in the area and address public health
questions.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                            19
Results Analysis



The Alberta Rabies Prevention and Control Manual: Guidance for Public Health and Veterinary
Professionals was published in 2019 and provided guidance on rabies prevention and control.
Additionally, the ministry continued tick surveillance to assess the risk of Lyme disease in Alberta.

2.6    Safeguard Albertans from communicable disease through increased immunization and
       initiatives aimed at decreasing sexually transmitted infections.

There is a continuing outbreak of sexually transmitted infections (STI), and the ministry provided an
additional $1 million in funding in 2018-19 to support enhanced STI outreach services by AHS.
The HIV PrEP program was established in 2018 to support HIV prevention in higher risk individuals, and
the Alberta Prenatal Screening Guidelines were updated to increase screening of all pregnant women for
chlamydia and gonorrhea.

As of March 31, 2019, 1.3 million doses of influenza vaccine were administered, covering 30 per cent of
the population. In 2018-2019, the influenza immunization program was expanded to allow pharmacists to
offer provincially funded influenza vaccine to people aged five or older. Pharmacists were also able to
offer provincially funded pneumococcal disease vaccine for Albertans over the age of 65.

The Education ministry and the Health ministry also began sharing information to support improvements
to immunization rates and timely response to outbreaks in schools. During the 2018-2019 school year,
AHS public health nurses started offering vaccines in the school setting to students in grades one to nine
with incomplete immunizations.


Performance Measures and Indicators

Performance Measure 2.a
     Influenza immunization: Percentage of Albertans who have received the recommended
     annual influenza immunization


                                               Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                                   2018-19           2018-19
      Population              2014-15          2015-16          2016-17          2017-18           Result             Target
                               Result           Result           Result           Result
  Seniors
  aged 65 or over               61%              63%               62%              60%              61%                64%
  Residents of
  LTC1 facilities               90%              90%               89%              89%              87%                91%
Sources: Numerator: Number of individuals immunized by age category: AHS zones; Alberta Health’s weekly pharmacists data;
First Nations and Inuit Health Branch, Indigenous Services Canada, Alberta Region.
Denominator: For seniors, the denominator is the ministry’s population estimates, based on mid-year registration population
estimates. For residents of long-term care facilities the denominator is the number of residents as of December 15, 2018 provided
by AHS.
1
  Long-term care


This performance measure tracks efforts towards immunization among high risk groups, including seniors
(aged 65 or over) and residents of long-term care facilities. Influenza immunization targets are set by the
ministry and are based on national immunization targets as set by the National Immunization Strategy
and agreed to by the Pan-Canadian Public Health Network Council. National targets are based on
epidemiological evidence to decrease disease incidence and complications from disease.



20                                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                             Results Analysis



Results Analysis

Influenza has a significant impact on the health of Albertans and tends to be most severe among older
Albertans, residents of long-term care facilities, infants, young children, and those with certain chronic
medical conditions. Rates of influenza immunization have remained relatively consistent over the last few
years but are not meeting national targets. Alberta performance results measure progress year-over-year
while maintaining the commitment to reach the national targets. Year-over-year target increases are more
achievable and help with program planning and evaluation.

Challenges with achieving target immunization rates are as follows:
• There is a short window of opportunity to immunize the population before influenza disease begins to
   spread in the province.
• Every long-term care resident is offered the influenza vaccine, which explains the higher rate of
   coverage in this group. A lower rate of immunization is observed among seniors living in the
   community because this type of one-to-one service that is offered is not possible for all Albertans
   65 years of age or older.
• There is a slight decrease from 89 per cent to 87 per cent in 2018-19; however this may be attributable
   to aggregate data collection methodology.
• Vaccine hesitancy has been increasing despite increased access to vaccine services and providing
   education about the benefits of annual influenza immunization.
• The belief that influenza is not a serious illness. Some people can be infected with the virus but have
   no symptoms, during this time, those people may still spread the virus to high-risk people.
The ministry continues to work with AHS, pharmacists, physicians and other stakeholders across Alberta
to increase access to influenza immunization and to focus efforts on steadily improving influenza
immunization rates and reporting over time. Pharmacist administration of publicly funded vaccines has
expanded the reach of immunization services to Albertans. Influenza vaccine effectiveness ranges from
10 to 50 per cent (unlike other vaccines that are upwards of 95 per cent effective). The ministry and
partners continue to communicate the importance and benefits of the annual influenza immunization.

Performance Indicator 2.a
     Childhood immunization rates (by age two)


                                                        Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                                                   2018
       Immunization
                                       2014               2015               2016              2017              Result
                                      Result            Result              Result            Result
   Diphtheria, tetanus,                76%                76%                77%                77%                78%
   pertussis, polio, Hib
   Measles, mumps,                     88%                88%1               88%               88%1                87%
   rubella
Source: Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan (AHCIP), Quarterly Population Registries; Immunization/Adverse Reactions to
Immunization (Imm/ARI); Alberta Vital Statistics, Birth Files.
1
  Results have been updated.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                          21
Results Analysis



This performance indicator shows efforts towards protecting children from a number of vaccine-
preventable diseases, some of which can be fatal or produce permanent disabilities. A high rate of
immunization reduces the incidence of these diseases and serves to control outbreaks.

This indicator reports the percentage of children in Alberta who by two years of age have received the
required immunization for specific childhood diseases (i.e. diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, polio, Hib,
measles, mumps, rubella).

Results Analysis

The department and AHS continue to work together to make progress towards national targets which
have been revised to 95 per cent for both diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, polio and haemophilus influenza
type b (DTaP-IPV-Hib) and measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccines.

Over the past five years, Alberta has achieved an immunization rate for these young Albertans of
between 75 per cent and 77 per cent to prevent DTaP-IPV-Hib and between 86 per cent and 88 per cent
to prevent MMR.

The provincial electronic immunization information repository captures all provincially-funded childhood
immunization information in Alberta.

AHS has focused on increasing access and decreasing wait times at public health clinics for routine
childhood immunization.

Performance Indicator 2.b
     Life expectancy at birth (years)


                                                          Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                                                     Current
        Population
                                      2014                2015                 2016                2017              Result
                                     Result              Result              Result               Result
  First Nations                       68.7                 69.9                69.1                67.7                67.91
  Non-First Nations                   80.1                 79.9                80.0                79.9                80.01
Sources: Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan Adjusted Population; Alberta Health Postal Code Translation File; Alberta Vital
Statistics Death File; First Nations Status Registry.
1
 Preliminary Data. Final Statistics expected to be available at the end of summer 2019.


This indicator compares the life expectancy of First Nations people to that of non-First Nations people in
the province of Alberta. Life expectancy at birth is an indicator of the overall health status of a population
and provides the number of years a given birth cohort would be expected to live if current age and sex
mortality rates remained constant. Life expectancy at birth is determined by a number of factors that
include genetic, social, and environmental conditions. It only takes into account the length of life and not
quality of life.

Results Analysis

In 2018, the gap in life expectancy between First Nations and non-First Nations populations in Alberta
was 12.1 years. Life expectancy among First Nations in Alberta is based on relatively small numbers that




22                                                                                            Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                                   Results Analysis



result in annual fluctuations making trends over a short period of time difficult to interpret. However, there
continues to be a large gap in life expectancy between First Nations and non-First Nations people in
Alberta over time. This data clearly shows that more needs to be done to address health disparities for
Indigenous peoples.

Globally, life expectancy at birth may be impacted by a host of factors that include access to and quality
of health care. These include factors such as income, housing, education, and employment conditions.
Importantly, for First Nations people, life expectancy may be influenced by a complex history that includes
intergenerational trauma from residential schools, higher rates of poverty, and systemic racism.

The Ministry of Health works to address health service improvements and health priorities to improve
health outcomes for Indigenous Albertans by collaborating with the province’s Regional Indigenous
Organizations, AHS, the Department of Indigenous Services Canada, and other partners. The Office of
the Chief Medical Officer of Health and the Alberta First Nations Information Governance Centre are
working together with an Advisory Committee to develop a report on the health status of First Nations
people in Alberta. The report aims to highlight health inequities and identify initial areas for action to
reduce identified gaps and improve the health of First Nations people in Alberta.

In addition, the ministry was involved with the Treaty 8 Protocol Agreement Health Table, Blackfoot
Confederacy Protocol Agreement, Métis Nation of Alberta Framework Agreement, and the Metis
Settlements General Council Long-Term Governance and Funding Arrangement. Progress is being made
in several key areas including: strengthened immunization information sharing; coordination of actions
through an Indigenous Integration Committee; and, collaboration with the Métis Nation of Alberta and
Metis Settlements General Council to develop health status information to identify community health
needs and future planning. Furthermore, work under the Protocol Agreements is focused on increasing
collaboration across all government ministries to identify and address the gap in health outcomes of
Alberta First Nations people and non-First Nations people.

Performance Indicator 2.c
     Infant1 mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)


                                                           Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                                                          2018
        Population
                                       2014                2015                  2016                2017               Result
                                      Result              Result                Result              Result
  First Nations                         10.4                 8.4                  7.5                  9.2                13.8
  Non-First Nations                     4.3                  4.2                  3.7                  4.4                 4.4
Sources: Alberta Vital Statistics Death File (infant deaths); Newborn Metabolic Screening Database (live births); First Nations
Status Registry.
1
  Infants less than one year of age.


Infant mortality is an important indicator of population health. The infant mortality rate provides the rate of
deaths for children less than one year of age, per 1,000 live births. Infant mortality is often used as an
indicator to measure the health status of a general population, because factors affecting the health of
entire populations can also impact the mortality rate of infants.

This indicator compares the infant mortality rate for the First Nations population to that of
the non-First Nations population in Alberta.


Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                                  23
Results Analysis



Results Analysis

There is a significant gap in the infant mortality rate for the First Nations population in Alberta in
comparison to the non-First Nations population. Infant mortality rates are based on relatively small
numbers that result in annual fluctuations, making trends over time difficult to interpret. Compared to
2017, the infant mortality rate for First Nations people is higher in 2018 while the rate for non-First Nations
people has remained relatively consistent.

Rates of death among infants under one year of age are associated with premature birth, lower birth
weight, and injury. These outcomes may be impacted by maternal health, and may be driven by socio-
environmental factors such as income, housing, education, and employment conditions. Importantly, for
First Nations people, infant mortality rates may be influenced by a complex history that includes
intergenerational trauma from residential schools, higher rates of poverty, and systemic racism.

To address the health status gaps between First Nations and non-First Nations populations in Alberta, the
ministry is committed to respectfully engaging with Indigenous leadership, communities, and peoples in
the design, delivery and stewardship of health services. Engagement and coordination processes with
Regional Indigenous Organizations including Métis Nation of Alberta, Metis Settlements General Council,
Confederacy of Treaty 6, Treaty 8 First Nations of Alberta, Blackfoot Confederacy and Stoney Nakoda
Tsuut’ina Tribal Council, builds upon the foundation of reconciliation and relationships.

The ministry continues to work in partnership with Indigenous people, and federal and provincial partners
to strengthen health services for Indigenous people in our province, and is supporting key initiatives
aimed at reducing disparities between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Albertans including supporting
expectant Indigenous mothers.

The Government of Alberta is committed to supporting midwifery as one option for women giving birth
and to improving access to this health service, including for rural and underserved areas and for
vulnerable populations.




24                                                                              Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                             Results Analysis



Outcome Three: Albertans receive care from highly skilled health care
providers and teams, working to their full scope of practice
Outcome statement |
Health care providers are vital to delivering high quality and safe care. This includes physicians, nurses,
pharmacists, paramedics, psychologists, dieticians, dentists, counsellors, chiropractors, and social
workers, among others. The right number, mix, and distribution of providers must align with health needs
across the province.


Key Strategies

3.1   Enhance the delivery of primary health care services through patient attachment to
      providers and health care teams, increased integration of services, timely access, and
      improved quality and safety.

Shifting to a more person-centred and sustainable health system, while maintaining quality and safety, is
dependent on the integration of efforts within the ministry and with health professions, post-secondary
institutions, stakeholder organizations, and Albertans. Primary Care Networks (PCNs) are key to
achieving this goal. In 2018-2019, the ministry made progress toward integration, including a PCN
Governance Framework to better integrate PCNs with AHS’ community-based services and other
program areas, reduce the number of information systems used across the health system, and physician
resource planning to better allocate physicians in accordance with needs.

In health information management, progress was made on the Central Patient Attachment Registry
(CPAR), a centralized provincial information system that stores the confirmed relationships between
patients and their primary provider. There are four PCNs currently participating in CPAR.

Changes to the Schedule of Medical Benefits became effective November 1, 2018 including provisions
pertaining to Medical Assistance in Dying and transgender patients.

3.2   Develop sustainable physician resource plans and compensation models, which enable the
      provision of high quality care and support collaborative practice within an interdisciplinary
      team-based environment.

Rate increases are a key driver of physician expenditures. In 2018, the Alberta Medical Association
(AMA) Amending Agreement was finalized and included no increases to physician rates and prices paid
for insured medical services. As part of the AMA amending agreement, the ministry is working with the
AMA to demonstrate the Blended Capitation Model, which is a form of alternative compensation for
primary care physicians.

To achieve more cohesive provincial standards for funding and physician remuneration in academic
medicine, as well as improved reporting and accountability, the Academic Medicine Health Service
Program was implemented in 2018-19.

In addition, changes to the Schedule of Medical Benefits became effective November 1, 2018 and
included expanding support for physicians working collaboratively with other health care providers in an
interdisciplinary team-based environment.



Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                           25
Results Analysis



3.3   Improve access to health care providers across the province and develop sustainable
      strategies that ensure the appropriate education, scope of practice, supply, mix and
      distribution of health care providers.

Highly skilled, well trained health care providers are central to the system’s overall performance ensuring
quality, safety and appropriateness in the provision of acute care services and community care.

The ministry made progress in 2018-19 to implement physician resource planning in Alberta. This
included working with the Physician Resource Planning Advisory Committee to provide advice on the
appropriate supply, distribution, and mix of physicians in Alberta. Emphasis was also placed on physician
distribution to rural and remote communities, underserviced urban areas and Indigenous communities.
Actions focused on recruitment tactics, education programs, labour market information, and international
medical graduate placement.

Scopes of practice expanded for nurses and midwives in 2018-19 through amendments to the Midwives
Profession Regulation and the Registered Nurse Profession Regulation. The ministry also completed a
review of the podiatry program in Alberta.

3.4   Enhance accountability and promote practice excellence among regulated health care
      providers.

In 2018-19, the ministry completed a review of the College of Naturopathic Doctors of Alberta’s code of
ethics and standards of practice, which resulted in the development of over 30 standards of practice. New
or revised standards of practice were also reviewed for the College of Podiatric Physicians of Alberta, the
College of Physicians and Surgeons of Alberta, the College and Association of Registered Nurses of
Alberta, the College of Dietitians of Alberta, and the Alberta College of Pharmacy.

3.5   Improve the effectiveness and efficiency of Alberta’s emergency medical services system,
      and support the expanded role of paramedics in the delivery of patient care.

In 2018-19, support for emergency medical services was increased by more than $20 million
(to $524 million), including support for the Community Paramedic Program, which allows paramedics to
provide care to seniors and other vulnerable Albertans in their homes, and Community Response Teams,
which facilitate local access to care for non-emergent patients by improving the ability for ambulances to
respond to emergent patients. Ministry funding of $29 million was also announced to hire 100 additional
paramedics and another $1 million to support the mental health of emergency medical services workers.




26                                                                            Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                           Results Analysis




Performance Measures and Indicators

Performance Measure 3.a
     Access to primary care through primary care networks: Percentage of Albertans enrolled in
     a primary care network


                             Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                           2018-19             2018-19
      2014-15               2015-16              2016-17              2017-18              Result              Target
       Result                Result               Result               Result
        77%                   78%                  80%                  82%                  82%                 80%
Source: Department of Health, Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan Statistical Supplement, Claims Assessment System (CLASS).


This measure is defined as the percentage of Albertans informally enrolled in a Primary Care Network
(PCN) as of March 31 of a given year. PCNs are the most common model of team-based primary health
care delivery in Alberta. PCNs are groups of doctors working collaboratively with teams of health care
professionals, such as nurses, dietitians and pharmacists, to meet primary health care needs in their
communities.

The result is based on the total number of patients enrolled in a PCN as a proportion of the total population
covered under the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan in a given fiscal year. Determining the number of
Albertans enrolled in a PCN will identify gaps in access.

Results Analysis

In 2018-19, 82 per cent of Albertans were enrolled in a PCN, this is two per cent higher than the target.
Growth has been steady at slightly more than one per cent per year for the past five years. A steady
growth in the number of physicians joining PCNs has had a positive impact on this measure. There is also
growing awareness of the benefit patients receive when enrolled in a PCN. These results show that the
focus on PCNs as the catalyst for a patient’s medical and health home is working.

Alberta now has 41 PCNs involving more than 80 per cent of primary care physicians, the full-time
equivalent of over 1,000 health care providers, providing services to close to 3.6 million Albertans.
Non-PCN affiliated family physicians may also be providing team-based care; they may be part of another
team model.

The enrollment calculation is based on visits over a rolling 36-month period, and which excludes healthy
Albertans who may not have visited a family physician in the last three years. These Albertans may still
have ready access and a relationship with a PCN-affiliated family physician but have not been counted in
the statistic. In addition, a small percentage of Albertans receive team-based primary health care in non-
family physician models such as nurse practitioner-led clinics.

The department is working with the PCN Physician Leads, Alberta Health Services (AHS), and primary
health care partners to support the evolution of primary care delivery across the province. According to
research conducted by the Canadian Institute for Health Information, access to a broad spectrum of
services including health promotion and disease prevention (offered by PCNs), as well as
comprehensive, multi-disciplinary and coordinated care, are markers of health care service delivery
excellence.


Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                             27
Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 3.a
     Emergency department wait times: Median earliest patient time (minutes) to see an
     emergency doctor (17 busiest sites; patient level of urgency)


                                                         Prior Years’ Results
     Patient Level of                                                                                      Current
         Urgency                 2014-15               2015-16               2016-17    2017-18            Result
                                  Result                Result                Result     Result
         CTAS 1                      13                    12                   11          12                111
         CTAS 2                      61                    56                   56          62                631
     CTAS 3, 4 and 5                 90                    84                   84          92                921
Source: National Ambulatory Care Reporting System format (NACRS).
1
  2018-19 Preliminary data as of Dec 31, 2018. Data expected in the fall of 2019.


This indicator measures the time interval between the earliest of triage date/time or registration date/time
and the date/time of physician initial assessment in the emergency department (ED). The indicator is
measured in minutes, using the 50th percentile, which represents the maximum length of time that
50 per cent of patients stay in the ED until they are initially assessed by a physician.

Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) is one indicator of priority for treatment and an indirect
estimator of the patient’s symptom severity on arrival to the ED developed by Canadian Association of
Emergency Physicians. The urgency or need for ED treatment decreases as CTAS scores increase.
The CTAS levels used are 1) resuscitation required, 2) emergent care required, 3) urgent care required,
4) less-urgent care required and 5) non-urgent care required.

Results Analysis

In November 2018, the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) released data on two emergency
department wait time indicators – time to initial physician assessment, and length of stay for admitted
patients. The wait time trend for both indicators is on the rise nationally and provincially, but Alberta
performs better than the national average for both and performs best among Canadian provinces for
length of stay in emergency departments for admitted patients. AHS continues to monitor and report on
the emergency department wait times indicator and is working to reduce ED wait times for admitted
patients.

The reasons for the slow movement of patients from ED into inpatient care are multi-faceted and
generally related to difficulties finding appropriate placement or services following hospital discharge. This
is typically not a reflection of ED effectiveness but throughput of in-patients within the hospital. Many in-
patients are waiting for discharge due to lack of available continuing care spaces or step-down beds in
community to support rehabilitation.

The department is working with AHS to reduce pressures on EDs and hospitals by improving access to,
and enhancing, primary health care, continuing care and home care services. Expansion of home and
palliative care, opening of community-based Urgent Care Centres, specialized intensive home care
programs, and implementation of Emergency Medical Services programs, including the expanded role of
community paramedics may help reduce ED pressures. Flow through the acute care system will also be




28                                                                                     Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                               Results Analysis



improved by opening alternate level of care beds for patients who do not need acute care and improving
access to continuing care options.



Outcome Four: A high quality, stable, accountable and sustainable
health system
Outcome statement |
The design of Alberta’s health system is based on access to safe, consistent, and readily available health
care services where all health care stakeholders are accountable for health outcomes. Barriers to
accessing care are reduced through innovative and evidence-informed best practices. Balancing physical
and technological infrastructure to enable high quality, integrated care with alternative solutions focused
on efficiency and cost effectiveness are necessary to ensure health system sustainability and reduce the
ever-growing costs of care.


Key Strategies

4.1   Slow the rate of growth in health spending through increased efficiencies, while continuing
      to enhance the delivery of appropriate and high quality health care services and ensuring
      appropriate and reasonable access to pharmaceuticals and supplemental health benefits for
      Albertans.

Economic pressures, continued population growth with growing demand for health care services, coupled
with the costs of delivering those services, are placing continued pressure on the publicly funded health
system.

The ministry is working with other provinces and territories under the new pan-Canadian generics
initiative to reduce generic drug prices, realizing more than $30 million in incremental savings for Alberta.

The department continually monitors, measures, and audits claims to contribute to accurate health
system billing and recovery of duplicate billing, recovering nearly $5 million for claims erroneously billed to
the ministry in 2018-2019.

In 2019, the ministry completed cost driver applications for physician, pharmacy and long-term care
services. These tools help the ministry monitor the financial impact and pressures of policy and system
changes.

4.2   Repair aging health infrastructure and build new health care facilities, where appropriate, to
      ensure such infrastructure meets current and future health care needs.

The ministry continued to work with AHS and the Ministry of Infrastructure to make investments in the
province’s health infrastructure. In 2018-19, a redeveloped maternity care unit at the Peter Lougheed
Centre in Calgary and new wing at the Medicine Hat Regional Hospital were opened. A facility in Red
Deer for detoxification and addiction treatment will be ready by September 2019. Progress continued on a
number of infrastructure projects (planning and/or construction) including a new Edmonton hospital,
Calgary Cancer Centre, Medicine Hat Regional Hospital renovations, Fort McMurray Residential Facility
Based Care, and Chinook Regional Hospital redevelopment in Lethbridge.



Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                            29
Results Analysis



4.3   Enhance data sharing, research, innovation, health technology assessment and knowledge
      translation to support evidence-informed policy, planning and practice.

The department made progress on number of ongoing initiatives that increase provincial capacity for
making evidence-informed decisions to provide the best care for Albertans.

The ministry’s Enabling New Models of Care initiative will support evolving physician payment models,
better data collection for evidence-based decision making, and tracking performance on health system
outcomes.

In 2018-19, the department and Alberta Health Services (AHS) each contributed $5 million to establish
the Health Innovation Implementation and Spread Fund. This Fund supports the implementation of
proven innovations in the health care system. An initial slate of five projects was selected in February
2019.

The Alberta Cancer Prevention Legacy Fund provided $9.2 million in funding to improve screening for
breast and lung cancer, improve cancer screening for underrepresented populations, and continue to
build the research resource developed by the Alberta Tomorrow Project.

4.4   Set health system expectations through a focus on appropriate access, patient safety,
      effectiveness, and patient experience, to reduce variations in clinical practice and health
      outcomes.

In 2018-19, the ministry engaged with key stakeholders across Alberta’s health care system to create a
shared understanding of health care quality and identify potential quality initiatives and priorities. This
included a focus on evidence-based appropriateness, enhancing patient safety, reducing clinical
variation, and enhancing quality across the health care spectrum.

The department and AHS continued to work to improve communications for referrals for consultation,
advice and treatment between primary care providers and specialists to shorten wait times with initiatives
such as eReferral and the Alberta Referral Directory.

4.5   Enhance a patient-centred, integrated health record to support decision-making by health
      providers and enable Albertans to take an active approach in managing their health by
      providing them with secure access to their own health information.

Netcare enhancements in 2018-19 enable physician offices and other care providers in the community to
transfer select patient information to Alberta Netcare for the purpose of improving care coordination.
As of March 15, 2019, there were 24 specialties participating in Alberta Netcare eReferral, where referrals
can be managed electronically.

AHS is in the final stages of configuring and testing a new organizational-wide clinical information system
– a single AHS electronic medical record for every patient receiving care in AHS.

The MyHealth Records portal launched in 2019, providing Albertans with online access to key personal
health information (sub-set of labs, dispensed medications and immunizations). The protected portal was
designed to meet industry-standard security practices. Since the launch of MyHealth Records 19,277
accounts have been created (as of March 31, 2019).




30                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                                Results Analysis



4.6    Develop an integrated plan for provincial laboratory services that will establish a centralized,
       single system for medical testing to meet growing demand.

The ministry established a new provincial laboratory services model and began work to consolidate
diagnostic laboratory services in the Edmonton and Northern Zones into an Edmonton Clinical Hub Lab.


Performance Measures and Indicators

Performance Measure 4.a
     Financial Sustainability: Annual rate of growth of Ministry of Health operational
     expenditures


                               Prior Year’s Results
                                                                                               2018-19               2018-19
       2014-15               2015-16               2016-17               2017-18               Result                Target
        Result                Result                Result                Result
        5.8%                   4.2%                  3.1%                  2.7%                  3.3%                   3%
Source: Ministry Consolidated Statement of Operations as presented in the Financial Statements in the Ministry of Health Annual
Report.


This measure is used to monitor the trend of financial resources used for the Ministry of Health and is an
indicator of fiscal sustainability and efficiency of the health system. This measure is defined as the
percentage year-over-year change in the Ministry Consolidated Statement of Operations as presented in
the Financial Statements in the Annual Report.

Results Analysis

In 2018-19, total expense for the Ministry of Health was nearly $22.2 billion (before inter-ministry
consolidation adjustments), a $715 million or 3.3 per cent increase from 2017-18. The ministry continues
to strive towards sustainability in health care spending while delivering effective and efficient health care
that meets the needs of Albertans. Government and health system partners continue to work to control
the three major cost drivers in the health care system – physician compensation, pharmaceuticals and
hospital services.

 • The current pharmacy agreement is expected to slow the growth of spending on government-
   sponsored drug programs.
 • As a member of the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance, Alberta works closely with provinces and
   territories to increase access to drug treatment options, achieve lower and consistent drug costs and
   improve consistency of coverage across Canada.
 • Operational efficiency, effectiveness and financial constraint continue to be priorities for AHS.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                                  31
Results Analysis



Performance Measure 4.b
     Access to the provincial Electronic Health Record (EHR): Number of health care
     professionals with access to Alberta Netcare


                            Previous Years’ Results
                                                                               2018-19            2018-19
       2014-15               2015-16                  2016-17   2017-18        Result              Target
        Result                Result                   Result    Result
       37,324                 40,587                  42,090    50,477          50,276             46,234
Source: Alberta Netcare Monthly Utilization Report.


Alberta Netcare is the common name for the provincial Electronic Health Record (EHR), a secure and
confidential electronic system of Alberta patients’ health information. The portal enables health care
providers (registered users) to access available health information, with new content continually being
added. Alberta Netcare, collects information from a variety of sources including hospitals, laboratories,
testing facilities, pharmacies and physician clinics into a unified patient record.

Results Analysis

Information is foundational to support evidence-informed health care delivery, policy development and
decision-making. Access to health information from providers, facilities and patients is needed to improve
health service delivery and keep pace with the use of technology in our daily lives. The provincial
electronic health record enables enhanced quality of care by providing better access to patient
information at point of care through integrated care and reduced disjointed care, gaps, overlaps, errors
and delays.

A total of 50,276 health professionals (physicians (including medical residents), nurses, pharmacists,
allied health professionals, optometrists, chiropractors and dentists) now have access to patient records
through Alberta Netcare, exceeding the 2018-2019 target of 46,234 by 8.7 per cent. While previous years
showed a steady growth rate of five per cent year-over-year in the total number of health professionals
with access to Alberta Netcare, in 2018-2019 there was a decrease of four per cent. This decrease is not
viewed as an indicator that interest or use of Alberta Netcare has plateaued, but rather as a result of
eliminating accounts that have been idle for more than 180 days. The gains made through the addition of
new Alberta Netcare users throughout the year was offset by the deletion of these idle accounts. The
2018-2019 result shows continued strong endorsement from health care professionals for the value of
information in the provincial EHR.

A number of initiatives may have positively influenced adoption of Netcare. The Real Time Integration
project focused on connecting community pharmacies so that pharmacy updates were reflected in real
time, may have contributed to the increase in the number of pharmacists accessing Alberta Netcare.
Additionally, the eHealth Support Services team has actively contacted community clinics about access to
Netcare, which may have contributed to the increase in physicians and other health professionals.

Developmental work has started on a new service that will electronically notify doctors when their patients
are admitted or discharged from a hospital in Alberta, receive day surgery, or visit an emergency
department.




32                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                               Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 4.a
     Per capita provincial government health expenditures (nominal dollars)


                                      Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                                                     2018
          2014                      2015                      2016                     2017                     Result
         Result                    Result                    Result                   Result
         $4,677                    $4,813                    $4,912                   $5,0041                   $5,0971
Source: Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI), National Health Expenditure Trends (NHEX), 1975 to 2018.
1
 Results for 2017 and 2018 are forecast as there is a two year lag in available actual results.


This indicator is used to monitor the trend of financial resources used for Alberta’s health system and is
an indicator of fiscal sustainability and efficiency of the health system. It includes spending by the ministry
of Health, including AHS, and health-related spending by other government departments and agencies
and is a gauge of the overall success of cost containment initiatives. The goal is to slow the growth of
overall government health spending to help make the system sustainable.

Results Analysis

Based on the five-year (2014-2018) period, per capita provincial government health expenditures
increased at an average of 2.2 per cent per year. This percentage is significantly lower compared to the
previous five-year period (2009-2013) where per capita provincial government health expenditures
increased at an average of four per cent per year. Alberta’s per capita provincial government health
expenditure growth rate between 2017 and 2018 is forecast to be 1.9 per cent which is lower than five
provinces (British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador) and the
national average.

The Ministry of Health continues to strive towards keeping year-over-year expenses restrained while
delivering effective and efficient care for Albertans. When comparing cost and outcome for other
jurisdictions in Canada, it appears that there are opportunities to streamline cost via improving efficiency
and effectiveness. To that end, government and health system partners are working to control the three
biggest cost drivers in the health care system – physician compensation, pharmaceuticals and hospital
services.

Curbing spending in these areas is expected to free up health dollars to invest in the shift to more
community-based health care, including mental health and addiction services, primary health care, home
care, continuing care, and improving health outcomes for Indigenous Albertans.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                            33
Results Analysis




Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology
Performance Measure 1.a
     Access to continuing care: Percentage of clients placed in continuing care within 30 days of
     being assessed

 Methodology


 Percentage of clients admitted to a Continuing Care Living Option (Designated Supportive Living or
 Long-term Care) within 30 days of the assessed and approved date.

 Assessed and Approved date refers to the date the client is placed on the waitlist for a Continuing Care
 Living Option following the completion of the assessment and approval process.

 The data excludes clients who transferred from a continuing care living option to another continuing
 care living option; clients assessed and approved but not yet admitted during the reporting period;
 clients in the process of being approved for continuing care living options; clients admitted to another
 zone from the reporting zone to avoid double-counting; clients referred for home care services; clients
 admitted to a sub-acute unit or a rehabilitation unit; clients admitted to a hospice or palliative care unit;
 clients admitted to an acute care bed/service for another acute care bed/service (e.g., surgical bed to a
 medical bed); and clients transferred to a non-tertiary acute care hospital bed (e.g., repatriated to a
 community hospital). The wait time also excludes days when a client was unavailable for placement due
 to medical reasons.



        # of individuals admitted to a CCLO within 30 days of their assessed and approved date
 %=                                                                                                    x 100
                   total # of individuals admitted to a CCLO during the response period

 Source
 Alberta Health Services. Data are extracted from Meditech and Stratahealth Pathways.




34                                                                              Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                               Results Analysis



Performance Measure 1.b
     Percentage of mental health patients with unplanned readmissions within 30 days of leaving
     hospital

 Methodology
 The unit of analysis is an inpatient encounter within a single acute inpatient facility. Discharges to
 transfer between acute inpatient facilities are excluded, although the discharge from the final facility after
 transfers would be included. In this way, episodes of care are identified with the reporting facility
 identified as the final discharging facility.

 Readmission rate reporting always lags by a quarter. Information is available once data from the
 Discharge Abstract Database (DAD) is collected by all facilities in the province and loaded into the
 provincial database. Enforced reporting lag is applied (90 days) to allow for completion of stay and load
 of the abstract record for the readmission stay.

 Readmission rates are attributed to the quarter in which a patient is originally discharged from an acute
 care hospital. This requires that patients be tracked for 30 days after the end of the quarter to allow
 sufficient time from the date of initial discharge to determine whether a readmission will occur.

 Since transfer is excluded from readmission and there are several non-standardized ways to determine
 whether a transfer has occurred, the readmission rates published elsewhere could differ. Since there is
 not a standard method to identify unplanned readmissions (e.g., admissions through emergency
 ambulatory care), readmission rates published elsewhere may differ. Unplanned admission is defined as
 admit category ‘U’ which is urgent/emergent admission. The data reliability is highly dependent on the
 accuracy of this field.

 Crude Readmission Rate (CRR):

             # discharged patients readmitted within 30 days of index discharge
 CRR =                                                                                x 100
              # index hospital discharges with MRDx as selected mental illness

 Risk Adjusted Rate (RAR):
 The observed number of cases is the actual count of readmissions to a hospital. The expected number
 of cases is based on the sum of the probabilities of readmissions to a hospital. Coefficients from the
 Canadian Institute for Health Information used for calculating the probability of readmissions were from
 logistic regression models on the following independent variables – age, sex, multiple previous
 admissions for a selected mental illness (two or more) during the past 12 months, discharges against
 medical advice, substance abuse related disorder, schizophrenia, anxiety disorder, and personality
 disorder.

                 # of observed cases
 RAR =                                       x the Canadian CRR
              number of expected cases

 Source

 Canadian Institute for Health Information; Alberta Health Services, Provincial Inpatient Database (DAD).




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                             35
Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 1.a
     Emergency visits due to substance use (per 100,000 population):

          • Alcohol
          • Opioids

 Methodology
 Emergency visits are any hospital discharges beginning with any of the following MIS codes: 71310
 (Ambulatory Care Services described as emergency), 71513 (Community Urgent Care Centre), and
 71514 (Community Advanced Ambulatory Care Centre).

 A discharge or emergency visit occurs when a patient leaves the hospital – by death, transfer to another
 facility, discharge to home, or against medical advice.

 Only Alberta residents are included in the numerator. Only the emergency visit rates based on the most
 responsible diagnosis fields are available.

 The date of birth and sex on the mid-year population registry file is used to calculate the age and sex of
 the individual as of June 30 each year.

 The population excludes members of the Armed Forces, RCMP, inmates in federal penitentiaries, or
 those who have opted out of the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan.
 Crude Visit Rate (CVR):

            # of emergency visits due to substance use for a given age roup in a given year
 CVR =                                                                                           x 100,000
                            total population for a given age in a given year

 The final result is the Age-standardized Rate: The crude rates by age group are converted to an age-
 standardized rate using the direct method of standardization with weights from the
 2011 Canada Census.


 Source
 Alberta Ambulatory Care database; Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan, Mid-year adjusted Population
 Registry Files Statistics Canada; Canadian population, 2011.




36                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                 Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 1.b
     Prevalence of cigarette smoking among Albertans (per cent):

          • 12-24 years of age
          • 25 years of age or older

 Methodology
 The Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS) has been conducted annually since 2007 and is a
 cross-sectional survey that collects information related to health status, health care utilization, and
 health determinants for the Canadian population. The CCHS includes a wide range of questions about
 the health and health behaviours of residents in each province. The CCHS covers the population
 12 years of age and over living in the 10 provinces and the three territories. Excluded from the survey’s
 coverage are persons living on reserves and other Aboriginal settlements in the provinces; full-time
 members of the Canadian Forces; and, the institutionalized population.

 Statistics Canada provides a Provincial Share file to each provincial/territorial health ministry. This file
 contains detailed survey responses for those participants agreeing to disclose to the ministry. In
 Alberta, the share file represents between 92 per cent and 95 per cent of participants in each cycle of
 the master file.

 For 2013-2014, the cigarette smoking indicator included the following self-reported responses: a) daily
 smoker, b) occasional smoker (former daily smoker), and c) always an occasional smoker.

 For 2015-2017, the cigarette smoking indicator included the following self-reported responses:
 a) current daily smoker and b) current occasional smoker.

 The percentage of cigarette smokers was estimated by tabulating a weighted proportion of those that
 responded as daily or occasional cigarette smokers. The standard errors were estimated from bootstrap
 weights provided by Statistics Canada.

                    weighted total of daily or occasional cigarette smokers
 Rate =                                                                                 x 100
                                   weighted total (all responses)

 Source
 Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS), Statistics Canada.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                37
Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 1.c
     Ambulatory care sensitive conditions: Hospitalization rate (per 100,000) for patients under
     75 years of age with conditions that could be prevented or reduced if they received
     appropriate care in an ambulatory setting

 Methodology
 Numerator: Total number of acute care hospitalizations for patients under 75 years of age for
 ambulatory care sensitive conditions (ACSCs):

     •        Inclusion Criteria: Any most responsible diagnosis code of grand mal status and other
              epileptic convulsions, chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases, acute lower respiratory
              infection, asthma, diabetes, heart failure and pulmonary edema, hypertension, and angina.
     •        Exclusion Criteria: Individuals 75 years of age or older, death before discharge, admission
              category recorded as newborn or stillbirth.
 Denominator: The total end-of-calendar year population younger than age 75.

 The population is age-adjusted using the 2011 Canada Census. A more detailed technical definition for
 the indicator can be found at: https://open.alberta.ca/dataset/pmis-performance-measure-definitions


                   total # of acute care hospitalizations for ACSCs under age 75 years
 Rate =                                                                                       x 100,000
                        total end-of-calendar year population under age 75 years

 Source
 Numerator: Alberta Health Services, Discharge Abstract Database (DAD); Denominator: Alberta Health
 Population Estimate.




38                                                                            Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                 Results Analysis



Performance Measure 2.a
     Influenza immunization: Percentage of Albertans who have received the recommended
     annual influenza immunization:

          • Seniors aged 65 or over
          • Residents of long-term care facilities

 Methodology
 Seniors aged 65 or over:


             # of seniors aged 65 or over who received one dose of the influenza vaccine
 Rate =                                                                                          x 100
                              Mid-year population estimate of age category

 Residents of long-term care (LTC) facilities:


            # of LTC residents on Dec 15, 2018 who received one dose of influenza vaccine (Oct 1-Dec 15,
                                                      2018)
 Rate =                                                                                                    x 100
                                        # of LTC residents on Dec 15, 2018

 It is necessary to define the number of residents of long-term care facilities on December 15 each year,
 due to the high turnover in this population. Otherwise, the result would be an immunization rate over
 100 per cent.


 Source
 Numerator: Number of individuals immunized by age category: Alberta Health Services zones; the
 ministry’s weekly pharmacists data; First Nations and Inuit Health Branch, Indigenous Services Canada,
 Alberta Region.

 Denominator: For seniors, the denominator is the ministry’s population estimates, based on mid-year
 registration population estimates. For residents of long-term care facilities the denominator is the
 number of residents as of December 15, 2018 provided by Alberta Health Services.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                              39
Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 2.a
     Childhood immunization rates (by age two):

          • Diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, polio, Hib
          • Measles, mumps, rubella

 Methodology
 Using data from the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan (AHCIP) population registries, children born in
 Alberta are followed through time. Exclusions include individuals leaving Alberta, individuals who died,
 individuals who do not belong to the study period, First Nations individuals, and residents of
 Lloydminster.

 Coverage rates are based on a birth cohort and reported at age two. For example, the 2018 rates relate
 to the 2016 birth cohort which turned age two.

 Once established the population-based birth cohort is linked to Imm/ARI using the Unique Lifetime
 Identifier and immunization dates.


 Calculation: Childhood immunization coverage is calculated using a survival analysis (time-to-
 immunization) method based on the specified population based birth cohort. The analysis
 measures the probability that the child will receive required vaccines by age two.


 Source
 Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan (AHCIP), Quarterly Population Registries. Immunization/Adverse
 Reactions to Immunization (Imm/ARI). Alberta Vital Statistics, Birth Files.




40                                                                           Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                  Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 2.b
     Life expectancy at birth (years):

          • First Nations
          • Non-First Nations

 Methodology
 Life expectancy is calculated using the commonly-used “period” life table methodology. A detailed
 description of the methodology used to convert age-sex specific death rates into life expectancy at birth
 can be found in Appendix 3 of the ministry’s Chronic Disease Projections Methodology, 2008.
 https://open.alberta.ca/publications/9780778566175.


 Source
 Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan Adjusted Population; Alberta Health Postal Code Translation File;
 Alberta Vital Statistics Death File; First Nations Status Registry.




Performance Indicator 2.c
     Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births):

          • First Nations
          • Non-First Nations

 Methodology
 Infant deaths are identified from the Alberta Vital Statistics Death file, while live births are identified
 from the Newborn Metabolic Screening Database. Infants are defined as less than one year of age
 (birth to 364 days).


                             # of infant deaths during a calendar year
 Infant Mortality Rate =                                                   X 1,000
                               # of live births during a calendar year

 Source
 Alberta Vital Statistics Death File (infant deaths); Newborn Metabolic Screening Database (live births);
 First Nations Status Registry.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                               41
Results Analysis



Performance Measure 3.a
     Access to primary care through primary care networks: Percentage of Albertans enrolled in
     a primary care network

     Methodology
     The numerator is the total number of patients enrolled in a Primary Care Network (PCN) in a given
     year as reported in Table 2.29 Primary Care Networks: Distribution of Primary Care Providers, Number
     of Patients, and Total Payments by Alberta Health Services Geographic Zone for the Service Year
     (April 1 to March 31), Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan Statistical Supplement.

     Patients are considered to be enrolled in a PCN if they are assigned to a physician, nurse practitioner,
     or pediatrician registered to a PCN. There are four steps used to assign a patient to a physician (part
     of the four-cut methodology):

     • Step 1: Patients who have seen one physician, nurse practitioner, or pediatrician only are assigned
       to that physician, nurse practitioner, or pediatrician.
     • Step 2: Patients who have seen more than one physician, but one physician is predominant, are
       then assigned to that physician.
     • Step 3: Patients who have seen multiple physicians the same number of times are assigned to the
       physician who did the physical examination last.
     • Step 4: Patients who have seen multiple physicians the same number of times, and had no physical
       examination done, are assigned to the physician who saw the patient last.
     The number of patients enrolled in a PCN is calculated by the payments issued to the program, which
     is associated with the providers within the PCN. The payments to the PCN are identified by the
     payments the providers receive through the Claims Assessment System (CLASS). CLASS is an
     application that collects and processes claims transactions for physicians of multiple disciplines, and
     provides information on compensation for physician services.

     The denominator is the number of people with an Alberta Personal Health Number that are registered
     and covered under the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan (AHCIP) as at March 31 of a given year.

     This number is reported in Table 1.1 of the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan Statistical Supplement.


                           total # of Albertans informally enrolled in a PCN in a given year
     Percentage =                                                                                    x 100
                       total population covered by the AHCIP as of March 31 in the same year

     Source
     Department of Health, Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan Statistical Supplement,
     Claims Assessment System (CLASS).




42                                                                              Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                              Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 3.a
     Emergency department wait times: Median earliest patient time (minutes) to see an
     emergency doctor (17 busiest sites; patient level of urgency):

          • CTAS 1
          • CTAS 2
          • CTAS 3, 4 and 5

 Methodology
 Wait time is measured in minutes between Start Time and End Time, where the Start Time is the
 earliest of either the Emergency Department (ED) Triage Time or the ED Visit (Registration) Time and
 the End Time of the ED visit is recorded as the Date/Time of the Physician Initial Assessment when
 available. The indicator uses median earliest patient time, which represents the length of time that
 50 per cent of patients stay in the ED until they are initially assessed by a physician.

 Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) is one measure of a patient’s priority for treatment and an
 indirect estimator of the symptom severity on arrival to the ED developed by Canadian Association of
 Emergency Physicians. The urgency or need for ED treatment decreases as CTAS scores increase.
 The CTAS levels used are 1) resuscitation required, 2) emergent care required, 3) urgent care required,
 4) less-urgent care required and 5) non-urgent care required.

 Valid records are defined by the inclusion and exclusion criteria below. Valid cases represents the
 eligible cases with a valid Start and End Time.

 Inclusion Criteria:
 • Emergency Visits: Unscheduled ED visit
 • Visit Mode: Face to Face
 • Service Provider: Most Responsible Provider to have service of Physician
 • Data from Alberta’s 17 busiest sites (i.e. high volume of Emergency Department visits) were used for
    these calculations: Chinook Regional Hospital, Medicine Hat Regional Hospital, Alberta Children’s
    Hospital, Foothills Medical Centre, Peter Lougheed Centre, Rockyview General Hospital, South
    Health Campus, Red Deer Regional Hospital Centre, Grey Nuns Community Hospital, Misericordia
    Community Hospital, Northeast Community Health Centre, Royal Alexandra Hospital, Stollery
    Children’s Hospital, Sturgeon Community Hospital, University of Alberta Hospital, Northern Lights
    Regional Health Centre, and Queen Elizabeth II Hospital.
 Exclusion Criteria:
 • Visit Disposition: Left without being seen by physician; Left prior to registration; Dead upon Arrival;
    unclassified Visit Disposition

 Wait time (minutes) =       Date/time of Physician Initial Assessment minus Earliest of either
                             ED Triage Date/Time or the ED Registration Date/Time
 Source
 National Ambulatory Care Reporting System format (NACRS).




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                             43
Results Analysis



Performance Measure 4.a
     Financial Sustainability: Annual rate of growth of Ministry of Health operational
     expenditures

 Methodology
 Calculation of percentage growth in ministry operational expenses when compared to Operational
 Expenses in the previous fiscal year.

 Operational Expenses is defined at total expenses per published Statement of Operations less
 infrastructure support.


                   total 2018/19 operational expenses – total 2017/18 operational expenses
 Growth % =                                                                                  x 100
                                     total 2017/18 operational expenses

 Source
 Ministry Consolidated Statement of Operations as presented in the Financial Statements in the Ministry
 of Health Annual Report.




Performance Measure 4.b
     Access to the provincial Electronic Health Record (EHR): Number of health care
     professionals with access to Alberta Netcare

 Methodology
 Administration staff members who actively access Alberta Netcare are not included in the provided
 numbers in order to showcase the clinical evidence.

 Number of health care professionals with access to the provincial EHR (includes physicians, medical
 residents, nurses, pharmacists, optometrists, dentists, chiropractors and allied health professionals).


 Sum of health professionals = 14,254 physicians (including medical residents) + 21,585 nurses
 + 7,079 pharmacists + 78 optometrists + 36 dentists + 27 chiropractors + 7,217 allied professionals


 Source
 Alberta Netcare Monthly Utilization Report.




44                                                                            Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                              Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 4.a
     Per capita provincial government health expenditures (nominal dollars)

 Methodology
 Data is extracted annually from provincial/territorial government public accounts. Programs and/or
 program items are classified into health expenditure categories according to accepted and standardized
 methods and definitions used in estimating national health expenditure. Data from the public accounts
 is supplemented with information from provincial/territorial government department annual reports and
 annual statistical reports when available, as well as information provided by provincial/territorial
 government department officials.

 Adjustments for regional health authority and/or hospital deficits or surpluses are not made in National
 Health Expenditures Trends (NHEX) unless the provincial government assumes them. If deficits or
 surpluses are assumed by the provincial government, they are allocated to the years when the regional
 health authority and/or hospitals accumulated them.

 As part of the preparation of the NHEX report, the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI)
 estimates of provincial/territorial government health expenditures were submitted to provincial/territorial
 departments of health for review.

 Provincial government health expenditure includes spending by the Ministry of Health and health-
 related spending by other government departments and agencies, as compiled by the CIHI.


                                                               provincial government health expenditure
 Per capita provincial government health expenditure =
                                                                          population estimates


 Source
 Canadian Institute for Health Information, National Health Expenditures Trends, 1975 to 2018.
 Statistics Canada, Demography Division (population estimates).




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                           45
Results Analysis




46                 Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                                           Financial Information




Financial Information

    Ministry Financial Highlights....................................................................................................        48
         Statement of Revenues and Expenses (unaudited) ............................................................                         49
         Revenue and Expense Highlights .........................................................................................            50
         Expenses – Directly Incurred Detailed by Object (unaudited) ..............................................                          53
    Supplemental Financial Information........................................................................................               55
         Tangible Capital Assets (unaudited) .....................................................................................           55
         Portfolio Investments (unaudited) .........................................................................................         56
    Financial Statements of Other Reporting Entities .................................................................                       57
         Alberta Health Services.........................................................................................................    59
         Health Quality Council of Alberta ..........................................................................................       107




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                                             47
Financial Information




Ministry Financial Highlights
Reporting Entity and Method of Consolidation

The consolidated financial information is prepared in accordance with Canadian Public Sector Accounting
Standards.

The reporting entity is the Ministry of Health, for which the Minister of Health is accountable. The accounts
of the Department of Health are fully consolidated with Alberta Health Services and Health Quality
Council of Alberta on a line-by-line basis.

Under the line-by-line method, accounting policies of the consolidated entities are adjusted to conform to
government accounting policies and the results of each line item in their financial statements (revenue,
expense, assets, and liabilities) are included in government’s results. Revenue and expense, capital,
investing and financing transactions and related asset and liability balances between the consolidated
entities have been eliminated.




48                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                                Financial Information



Ministry of Health

Statement of Revenues and Expenses (unaudited)
Year ended March 31, 2019
(in thousands)



                                                                     2019                      2018              Change from
                                                          Budget            Actual             Actual        Budget    2018 Actual
Revenues                                                (Restated)                           (Restated)
 Government Transfers
   Government of Alberta Transfers                  $       442,000 $          440,000 $         441,981 $      2,000 $      (1,981)
   Federal Government Transfers                           4,633,287          4,569,848         4,375,151       63,439       194,697
 Premiums, Fees and Licences                                534,001            580,542           562,542      (46,541)       18,000
 Investment Income                                           68,006             68,544            67,999         (538)          545
 Refunds of Expense                                         169,105            201,826           201,190      (32,721)          636
 Other Revenue                                              407,278            457,080           480,007      (49,802)      (22,927)
 Ministry Total                                           6,253,677          6,317,840         6,128,870      (64,163)      188,970
 Inter-Ministry Consolidation Adjustments                  (472,800)          (473,004)         (483,488)         204        10,484
Adjusted Ministry Total                                   5,780,877          5,844,836         5,645,382      (63,959)      199,454
Expenses - Directly Incurred
 Ministry Support Services                                   74,607             60,349            61,923       14,258        (1,574)
 Physician Compensation and Development                   5,296,164          5,406,137         5,164,360     (109,973)      241,777
 Drugs and Supplemental Health Benefits                   2,273,974          2,202,674         2,144,520       71,300        58,154
 Population and Public Health                               668,480            614,900           582,401       53,580        32,499
 Acute Care                                               4,116,877          4,124,192         4,109,343       (7,315)       14,849
 Continuing Care                                          1,107,000          1,125,904         1,062,999      (18,904)       62,905
 Ambulance Services                                         524,000            525,530           500,801       (1,530)       24,729
 Community Care                                           1,482,000          1,411,257         1,348,896       70,743        62,361
 Home Care                                                  691,000            688,040           609,579        2,960        78,461
 Diagnostic, Therapeutic & Other Patient Services         2,458,648          2,475,531         2,430,818      (16,883)       44,713
 Administration                                             559,504            571,800           522,481      (12,296)       49,319
 Support Services                                         2,190,000          2,241,339         2,208,741      (51,339)       32,598
 Information Technology                                     579,345            584,459           574,966       (5,114)        9,493
 Research and Education                                     154,000             99,469           100,419       54,531          (950)
 Debt Servicing                                              16,000             15,353            15,825          647          (472)
 Infrastructure Support                                      48,990             44,360            44,521        4,630          (161)
 Cancer Research and Prevention Investment                   12,800              6,567               -          6,233         6,567
 Ministry Total                                          22,253,389         22,197,861        21,482,593       55,528       715,268
 Inter-Ministry Consolidation Adjustments                  (183,360)          (277,663)         (258,216)      94,303       (19,447)
Adjusted Ministry Total                                  22,070,029         21,920,198        21,224,377      149,831       695,821
Annual Deficit                                      $ (16,289,152) $        (16,075,362) $    (15,578,995) $ (213,790) $   (496,367)




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                                     49
Financial Information



Ministry of Health
The consolidated Ministry Financial Statements includes: Department of Health; Alberta Health Services;
and Health Quality Council of Alberta.

Revenue and Expense Highlights

Revenues
Consolidated Actual Revenues (prior to inter-ministry consolidation adjustments)


                                                  Other Revenue        Government of Alberta
                             Refunds of Expense
                                                       7%                   Transfers
                                     3%
                                                                                7%
                Investment Income
                        1%


                Premiums, Fees and
                     Licences
                         9%




                                                                              Federal Government
                                                                                   Transfers
                                                                                      73%

Actual revenues exceeded the budget by $64 million mainly due to:

• Premium, Fees & Licenses resulting from increased number of patients availing health services that
     were billed to other jurisdictions and non-residents of Canada;
• Refunds of Expense due to recoveries of unutilized grant funding from previous years and clearing
     unpaid prior year over accruals for demand-driven programs; and
• Other Revenue due to higher than anticipated recoveries from external entities such as Workers
     Compensation Board and contracted health service providers, and unbudgeted revenue related to
     spending for various initiatives funded by donations and non-government grants.
Partially offsetting the excess is reduced Canada Health Transfers due to negative prior year adjustment
and a downward revision to the population share of Alberta.

Compared to prior year, revenues increased by $189 million mainly due to:

• Federal Government Transfers resulting from annualized increase in Canada Health Transfer, and the
     newly established funding for Home and Community Care Services and Mental Health and Addiction
     Services.




50                                                                                Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                           Financial Information




Expenses
Consolidated Actual Expenses (prior to inter-ministry consolidation adjustments)

                             Information Technology           Others*
                                        3%                      0.7%          Ministry Support Services
                  Support Services
                           10%                                                           0.3%

               Administration
                                                                                        Physician Compensation
                      3%
                                                                                           and Development
    Diagnostic, Therapeutic &                                                                      24%
     Other Patient Services
                11%
                 Home Care
                                                                                        Drugs and Supplemental
                      3%                                                                    Health Benefits
                                                                                                     10%
                    Community Care
                            6%                                                        Population and Public
                                                                                             Health
                    Ambulance Services       Continuing Care           Acute Care               3%
                           2%
                                                     5%                   19%

* includes Research and Education, Debt Servicing, Infrastructure Support, and Cancer Research and Prevention Investment.


Actual expenses were lower than the budget by $56 million mainly due to surplus in:
• Drugs and Supplemental Health Benefits resulting from the new pricing agreement on generic drugs,
   higher cost recoveries from product listing agreements, and savings related to the new pharmacy
   agreement;
• Population and Public Health due to reduced requirements for the Insulin Pump Therapy program, and
   lower than anticipated requirements for Pharmacist Injection Services as a result of the new pharmacy
   agreement;
• Community Care due to timing of implementation of various initiatives, including the Continuing Care
   Capacity Plan, and a shift in actual expenses to Continuing Care related to new bed openings during
   the year while the related budget remained in Community Care; and
• Research and Education due to expenses related to clinical education originally budgeted in Research
   and Education but actual expenses recorded in Physician Compensation and Development for a
   better alignment.
The surplus was partially offset by deficits in:

• Physician Compensation and Development due to earlier than anticipated funding for the Medical
   Liability Reimbursement program and expenses for clinical education (as mentioned above); and
• Support Services due to reclassification of bad debt expense from Acute Care to Support Services to
   align with Canadian Institute for Health Information’s Management Information System standards,
   increased activity, and direct and indirect costs related to the carbon levy.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                             51
Financial Information



Compared to prior year expenses increased by $715 million mainly due to:

• Physician Compensation and Development primarily attributed to volume growth in Fee for Service
     and increased activities including a higher number of surgeries performed;
• Drugs and Supplemental Health benefits due to increased utilization of newly approved cancer drugs
     and higher uptake of pharmacy services;
• Continuing Care due to increased spending related to the opening of beds under the Continuing Care
     Capacity Plan;
• Community Care due to increased spending and activity related to various initiatives, including the
     opening of new beds as part of the Continuing Care Capacity Plan;
• Home Care mainly due to increased spending related to Enhancing Care in the Community;
• Diagnostic, Therapeutic and Other Patient Services due to increased activity related to certain
     laboratory and diagnostic imaging tests, including colorectal cancer screening, CT and MRI scans; and
• Administration resulting from emerging insurance liability claims that increased the actuarial estimates,
     and decrease in vacancies from the prior year resulting from overall increase of activity throughout the
     organization.




52                                                                              Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                   Financial Information



Ministry of Health

Expenses – Directly Incurred Detailed by Object (unaudited)
(in thousands)

                                                           2019                        2018

                                                Budget            Actual               Actual
                                              (Restated)                             (Restated)

Grants                                    $      6,656,797    $    6,579,024   $         6,416,970

Supplies and Services                            5,780,596         5,667,919             5,416,863

Salaries, Wages and Employee Benefits            8,355,888         8,420,613             8,183,057

Amortization of Tangible Capital Assets            551,468           544,239               553,829

Consumption of Inventories of Supplies             890,500           921,458               857,501

Financial Transactions and Other                    18,140            64,608                54,373
                                          $     22,253,389    $   22,197,861   $        21,482,593




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                     53
Financial Information



                                            2019 Actual (unaudited)


                                                      Consumption of
                         Amortization of
                         Tangible Capital
                                                       Inventories of
                             Assets                       Supplies
                                3%                          4%

                                                                              Grants
                                                                               30%




          Salaries, Wages and
           Employee Benefits
                  38%



                                                                   Supplies and
                                                                     Services
                                                                        25%

• The ministry’s operating expenses incurred were primarily for Grants, Supplies and Services, and
     Salaries, Wages and Employee benefits, which accounted for 93% of the total operating expenses.
• Salaries, Wages, and Employee benefits totaled 38% ($8.4 billion) of the operating expenses and
     were primarily for delivery and provision of health services, and administering various grant programs.
• Grants comprised 30% ($6.6 billion) of the operating expenses and were primarily for Physician
     Compensation and Development, and Drugs and Supplemental Health benefits. Other grant expenses
     include restricted funding to support organizations and communities through grant programs, and
     funding for out-of-province health services.
• Supplies and Services resulted in 25% ($5.7 billion) of the operating expenses attributed mainly to
     contracts with health service providers, which include voluntary and private health service providers,
     and payments to non-employees under contract like physicians for referred-out services, purchased
     services, and home support contracts.
• The remainder of ministry expenses were amortization of tangible capital assets ($544 million),
     consumption of inventories of supplies ($921 million), and financial transactions and other expenses
     ($64 million).




54                                                                                Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                                                        Financial Information



Ministry of Health

Supplemental Financial Information
Tangible Capital Assets (unaudited)
(in thousands)

                                                                                          2019                                                          2018

                                                                                                        Computer
                                                                                                        Hardware
                                                                           Land                           and           Leasehold
                                            Land       Buildings (1)   Improvements     Equipment       Software         Assets          Total          Total

Estimated Useful Life                     Indefinite   10-40 years      5-40 years      3-20 years      3-10 years     Term of Lease


Historical Cost (2)
   Beginning of year                  $       116,875 $ 10,958,874 $         84,197 $ 2,502,386 $ 1,859,398 $                243,426 $ 15,765,156 $ 14,852,596
   Additions (3)                                  -        530,134           10,052     159,514     182,265                    5,173      887,138      959,751
   Disposals, including write-downs               (52)      (7,887)             (61)   (115,038)    (31,576)                    (475)    (155,089)     (47,191)
                                              116,823   11,481,121           94,188   2,546,862   2,010,087                  248,124   16,497,205   15,765,156

Accumulated Amortization
  Beginning of year                                -      4,064,679          65,283       1,889,488       1,469,749          184,404     7,673,603      7,166,572
  Amortization expense                             -        291,885           3,627         147,836          92,458            8,433       544,239        553,829
  Effect of disposals                              -         (6,859)            (59)       (113,395)        (31,574)            (468)     (152,355)       (46,798)
                                                   -      4,349,705          68,851       1,923,929       1,530,633          192,369     8,065,487      7,673,603

Net Book Value at March 31, 2019      $       116,823 $ 7,131,416 $          25,337 $       622,933 $       479,454 $         55,755 $ 8,431,718
Net Book Value at March 31, 2018      $       116,875 $ 6,894,195 $          18,914 $       612,898 $       389,649 $         59,022             $ 8,091,553

(1)
    Buildings include parking lots.
(2)
    Historical cost includes work-in-progress at March 31, 2019 totaling $1,633,567 (2018 - $1,186,196).
(3)
    Additions include total contributed capital assets of $285,368 (2018 - $337,908) consisting of $285,322 from Ministry of Infrastructure (2018 - $337,837), of
    which $nil (2018 - $6,286) was related to land and $285,322 (2018 - $331,551) was related to other tangible capital assets, and $46 from other sources (2018 -
    $71).




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                                                                55
Financial Information



Ministry of Health

Portfolio Investments (unaudited)
(in thousands)


                                                          2019                                  2018
                                               Cost              Fair Value          Cost              Fair Value
Cash held for investing purposes          $       110,887 $            110,887   $      118,011 $            118,011
Interest bearing securities
       Money market securities                    177,199              177,199          124,320              124,320
       Fixed income securities                  1,467,858            1,485,637         1,549,534           1,540,139
                                                1,645,057            1,662,836         1,673,854           1,664,459
Equities:
       Canadian pooled equity funds               157,851              175,391          142,929              158,030
       Global pooled equity funds                 288,454              329,954          326,465              376,252
                                                  446,305              505,345          469,394              534,282
Total Portfolio Investments               $     2,202,249 $          2,279,068   $     2,261,259 $         2,316,752



The following is a breakdown of portfolio investments:

                                                          2019                                  2018
                                                Cost             Fair Value           Cost             Fair Value
Operating                                 $      2,127,092 $         2,203,911   $     2,186,565 $         2,242,058
Endowments                                            75,157            75,157              74,694            74,694
Total Portfolio Investments               $      2,202,249 $         2,279,068   $     2,261,259 $         2,316,752




56                                                                               Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                                          Financial Information




Financial Statements of Other Reporting Entities


Index of Audited Financial Statements
        Alberta Health Services.........................................................................................................    59
        Health Quality Council of Alberta ..........................................................................................       107




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                                            57
Financial Information




58                      Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                                           Financial Information




Alberta Health Services



Consolidated Financial Statements
Table of Contents

Management’s Responsibility for Financial Reporting .......................................................................                  60

Independent Auditor’s Report ............................................................................................................    61

Consolidated Statement of Operations ..............................................................................................          63

Consolidated Statement of Financial Position ...................................................................................             64

Consolidated Statement of Change in Net Debt ................................................................................                65

Consolidated Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses .......................................................                             66

Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows .............................................................................................           67

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements ...............................................................................               68

Schedule 1 – Consolidated Schedule of Expenses by Object ...........................................................                         97

Schedule 2 – Consolidated Schedule of Salaries and Benefits .........................................................                        98

Schedule 3 – Consolidated Schedule of Segment Disclosures .........................................................                         105




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                                             59
Financial Information




Management’s Responsibility for Financial Reporting

The accompanying consolidated financial statements for the year ended March 31, 2018 are the responsibility of management
and have been reviewed and approved by senior management. The consolidated financial statements were prepared in
accordance with Canadian Public Sector Accounting Standards and the financial directives issued by Alberta Health, and of
necessity include some amounts based on estimates and judgement.

To discharge its responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of financial reporting, management maintains systems of financial
management and internal control which give consideration to costs, benefits and risks that are designed to:

     •   Provide reasonable assurance that transactions are properly authorized, executed in accordance with prescribed
         legislation and regulation, and properly recorded so as to maintain accountability of public money;
     •    Safeguard the assets and properties of the “Province of Alberta” under Alberta Health Services’ administration


Alberta Health Services carries out its responsibility for the consolidated financial statements through the Audit & Risk
Committee (the Committee). The Committee meets with management and the Auditor General of Alberta to review financial
matters, and recommends the consolidated financial statements to the Alberta Health Services Board for approval upon
finalization of the audit. The Auditor General of Alberta has free access to the Committee.

The Auditor General of Alberta provides an independent audit of the consolidated financial statements. His examination is
conducted in accordance with Canadian Generally Accepted Auditing Standards and includes tests and procedures which
allow him to report on the fairness of the consolidated financial statements prepared by management.




[Original signed by Dr. Verna Yiu, MD, FRCPC]                      [Original signed by Deborah Rhodes, CPA, CA]


Dr. Verna Yiu, MD, FRCPC                                           Deborah Rhodes, CPA, CA
President and Chief Executive Officer                              Vice President Corporate Services and Chief Financial Officer
Alberta Health Services                                            Alberta Health Services




May 30, 2019




60                                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                      Financial Information




Independent Auditor’s Report
To the Members of the Alberta Health Services Board and the Minister of Health


Report on the Consolidated Financial Statements

Opinion
I have audited the consolidated financial statements of Alberta Health Services (the Group), which comprise the
consolidated statement of financial position as at March 31, 2019, and the consolidated statements of operations,
remeasurement gains and losses, change in net debt, and cash flows for the year then ended, and notes to the
consolidated financial statements, including a summary of significant accounting policies.

In my opinion, the accompanying consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the
consolidated financial position of the Group as at March 31, 2019, and the results of its operations, its
remeasurement gains and losses, its changes in net debt, and its cash flows for the year then ended in accordance
with Canadian public sector accounting standards.

Basis for opinion
I conducted my audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards. My responsibilities under
those standards are further described in the Auditor's Responsibilities for the Audit of the Consolidated Financial
Statements section of my report. I am independent of the Group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are
relevant to my audit of the consolidated financial statements in Canada, and I have fulfilled my other ethical
responsibilities in accordance with these requirements. I believe that the audit evidence I have obtained is sufficient
and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion.

Other information
Management is responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the information included in the
Annual Report, but does not include the consolidated financial statements and my auditor’s report thereon. The
Annual Report is expected to be made available to me after the date of this auditor’s report.

My opinion on the consolidated financial statements does not cover the other information and I do not express any
form of assurance conclusion thereon.

In connection with my audit of the consolidated financial statements, my responsibility is to read the other information
identified above and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the
consolidated financial statements or my knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise appears to be materially
misstated.

If, based on the work I will perform on this other information, I conclude that there is a material misstatement of this
other information, I am required to communicate the matter to those charged with governance.

Responsibilities of management and those charged with governance for the consolidated financial
statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the consolidated financial statements in
accordance with Canadian public sector accounting standards, and for such internal control as management
determines is necessary to enable the preparation of the consolidated financial statements that are free from material
misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.

In preparing the consolidated financial statements, management is responsible for assessing the Group’s ability to
continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern and using the going concern
basis of accounting unless an intention exists to liquidate or to cease operations, or there is no realistic alternative but
to do so.

Those charged with governance are responsible for overseeing the Group’s financial reporting process.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                           61
Financial Information



Auditor's responsibilities for the audit of the consolidated financial statements
My objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements as a whole
are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor's report that includes my
opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in
accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards will always detect a material misstatement when it
exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate,
they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these
consolidated financial statements.

As part of an audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards, I exercise professional
judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit. I also:
•   Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements, whether due to
    fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is
    sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement
    resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional
    omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control.
•   Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures that are
    appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the
    Group’s internal control.
•   Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and
    related disclosures made by management.
•   Conclude on the appropriateness of management’s use of the going concern basis of accounting and, based on
    the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast
    significant doubt on the Group’s ability to continue as a going concern. If I conclude that a material uncertainty
    exists, I am required to draw attention in my auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the consolidated
    financial statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify my opinion. My conclusions are based on
    the audit evidence obtained up to the date of my auditor’s report. However, future events or conditions may
    cause the Group to cease to continue as a going concern.
•   Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the consolidated financial statements, including the
    disclosures, and whether the consolidated financial statements represent the underlying transactions and events
    in a manner that achieves fair presentation.
•   Obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the financial information of the entities or business
    activities within the Group to express an opinion on the consolidated financial statements. I am responsible for
    the direction, supervision and performance of the group audit. I remain solely responsible for my audit opinion.

I communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and timing of
the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in internal control that I identify during my
audit.


[Original signed by W. Doug Wylie, FCPA, FCMA, ICD.D]
Auditor General

May 30, 2019
Edmonton, Alberta




62                                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                 Financial Information



Alberta Health Services


Consolidated Statement of Operations
Year ended March 31, 2019
(thousands of dollars)

                                        CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS
                                                YEAR ENDED MARCH 31
                                                                   2019                                2018
                                                          Budget           Actual                     Actual
                                                          (Note 3)
 Revenues:
  Alberta Health transfers
    Base operating                                     $     12,486,000    $    12,485,595   $            12,147,985
    One-time base operating                                           -             29,558                    14,683
    Other operating                                           1,283,000          1,192,862                 1,134,483
    Recognition of expended deferred capital revenue             62,000             65,104                    66,085
  Other government transfers (Note 4)                           427,000            429,665                   438,127
  Fees and charges                                              488,000            538,721                   518,930
  Ancillary operations                                          136,000            133,513                   132,661
  Donations, fundraising, and non-government
    contributions (Note 5)                                     149,000            167,192                      160,076
  Investment and other income (Note 6)                         209,000            232,494                      242,813

 TOTAL REVENUE                                               15,240,000         15,274,704                14,855,843

 Expenses:
  Community-based care                                        1,514,000          1,439,434                 1,369,846
  Home care                                                     692,000            688,295                   609,579
  Continuing care                                             1,118,000          1,136,343                 1,072,800
  Population and public health                                  352,000            347,726                   344,283
  Ambulance services                                            527,000            528,045                   503,274
  Acute care                                                  5,054,000          5,044,824                 4,928,854
  Diagnostic and therapeutic services                         2,450,000          2,505,411                 2,413,056
  Education and research                                        317,000            316,285                   299,179
  Support services (Note 7)                                   2,210,000          2,259,472                 2,222,553
  Information technology                                        497,000            507,605                   510,835
  Administration (Note 8)                                       509,000            539,895                   490,188

 TOTAL EXPENSES (Schedules 1 and 3)                          15,240,000         15,313,335                14,764,447

 ANNUAL OPERATING (DEFICIT) SURPLUS                                   -           (38,631)                      91,396


 Accumulated surplus, beginning of year                       1,317,000          1,317,055                 1,225,659
 Accumulated surplus, end of year (Note 19)            $      1,317,000    $     1,278,424   $             1,317,055




The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these consolidated financial statements.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                    63
Financial Information




Alberta Health Services


Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
As at March 31, 2019
(thousands of dollars)




     [Original signed by Linda Hughes]   [Original signed by David Carpenter, FCPA, FCA]

     Linda Hughes                        David Carpenter, FCPA, FCA
     Board Chair                         Audit & Risk Committee Chair




64                                                           Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                Financial Information



Alberta Health Services


Consolidated Statement of Change in Net Debt
Year ended March 31, 2019
(thousands of dollars)

                             CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGE IN NET DEBT
                                         YEAR ENDED MARCH 31
                                                             2019                                      2018
                                                     Budget          Actual                           Actual
                                                    (Note 3)

   Annual operating (deficit) surplus                   $               -   $        (38,631)    $          91,396

   Effect of changes in tangible capital assets:
    Acquisition of tangible capital assets (Note 18)          (1,406,000)          (879,325)             (950,869)
    Amortization and disposals of tangible capital
     assets (Note 18)                                            533,000             529,628               538,639

   Effect of other changes:
    Net increase in expended deferred capital
     revenue                                                     709,000             189,664               185,684
    Net decrease (increase) in inventories for
                                                                    7,000             (9,936)               (4,691)
     consumption
    Net decrease (increase) in prepaid expenses and
                                                                    7,000             (2,001)             (37,663)
     other non-financial assets
    Net remeasurement (losses) gains for the year                 (1,000)             13,634                (8,031)

   Increase in net debt for the year                            (151,000)          (196,967)             (185,535)

   Net debt, beginning of year                                  (220,000)          (220,257)              (34,722)

   Net debt, end of year                                $       (371,000)   $      (417,224)     $       (220,257)

The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these consolidated financial statements.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                  65
Financial Information




Alberta Health Services


Consolidated Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses
Year ended March 31, 2019
(thousands of dollars)

                  CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF REMEASUREMENT GAINS AND LOSSES
                                    YEAR ENDED MARCH 31
                                                            2019                                          2018
                                                   Budget           Actual                               Actual
                                                   (Note 3)

 Unrestricted unrealized gains (losses) attributable
 to:
   Derivatives                                                   $               -   $         253   $         (40)
   Portfolio Investments                                                  (16,000)          17,751           8,730

 Amounts reclassified to the Consolidated
 Statement of Operations:
  Portfolio Investments                                                     15,000       (4,370)          (16,721)

 Net remeasurement gains (losses) for the year                             (1,000)          13,634         (8,031)
 Accumulated remeasurement gains, beginning of
  year                                                                      21,000          20,835          28,866
 Accumulated remeasurement gains, end of year
  (Note 10)                                                      $          20,000   $      34,469   $      20,835

The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these consolidated financial statements.




66                                                                                Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                Financial Information



Alberta Health Services


Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
Year ended March 31, 2019
(thousands of dollars)
                                   CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
                                           YEAR ENDED MARCH 31
                                                                   2019                              2018
                                                                  Actual                            Actual

 Operating transactions:
  Annual operating (deficit) surplus                              $             (38,631)    $                91,396
  Non-cash items:
     Amortization and disposals of tangible capital assets                       529,628                   538,639
     Recognition of expended deferred capital revenue                          (383,405)                 (384,337)
     Revenue recognized for acquisition of land                                        -                    (6,286)
  Decrease (increase) in:
    Accounts receivable related to operating transactions                        48,303                       2,116
    Inventories for consumption                                                  (9,936)                    (4,691)
    Prepaid expenses and other non-financial assets                              (2,001)                   (37,663)
  Increase (decrease) in:
    Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
       related to operating transactions                                          76,173                     61,996
    Employee future benefits                                                      15,360                     20,099
    Unexpended deferred operating revenue                                       (31,957)                   (37,555)
 Cash provided by operating transactions                                        203,534                    243,714

 Capital transactions:
  Acquisition of tangible capital assets                                       (593,957)                 (612,961)
  Increase in accounts payable and
    accrued liabilities related to capital transactions                           19,732                   142,554
 Cash applied to capital transactions                                          (574,225)                 (470,407)

 Investing transactions:
   Purchase of investments                                                   (3,161,266)               (3,168,353)
   Proceeds on disposals of investments                                        3,220,278                 3,109,935
 Cash provided by (applied to) investing transactions                             59,012                   (58,418)

 Financing transactions:
   Restricted capital contributions received                                    331,364                    264,565
   Unexpended deferred capital revenue returned                                    (250)                    (7,381)
   Proceeds from debt                                                                  -                     67,300
   Principal payments on debt                                                   (22,133)                   (17,612)
   Payments on obligations under capital leases                                  (2,349)                    (2,207)
   Payment on life lease deposits                                                  (596)                        596
 Cash provided by financing transactions                                        306,036                    305,261

 (Decrease) increase in cash                                                     (5,643)                     20,150

 Cash, beginning of year                                                         66,253                      46,103

 Cash, end of year                                                $              60,610     $                66,253


The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these consolidated financial statements.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                  67
Financial Information




Alberta Health Services


Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the year ended March 31, 2019
(thousands of dollars)


Note 1 Authority, Purpose and Operations

         Alberta Health Services (AHS) was established under the Regional Health Authorities Act (Alberta), effective
         April 1, 2009, as a result of the merger of 12 formerly separate health entities in Alberta.

         Pursuant to Section 5 of the Regional Health Authorities Act (Alberta), AHS is responsible in Alberta to:
           •   promote and protect the health of the population and work toward the prevention of disease and injury;
           •   assess on an ongoing basis the health needs of the population;
           •   determine priorities in the provision of health services and allocate resources accordingly;
           •   ensure that reasonable access to quality health services is provided and;
           •   promote the provision of health services in a manner that is responsive to the needs of individuals and
               communities and supports the integration of services and facilities.

         Additionally, AHS is accountable to the Minister of Health (the Minister) for the delivery and operation of the
         public health system.

         The AHS consolidated financial statements include the revenue and expenses associated with its
         responsibilities. These consolidated financial statements do not reflect the complete costs of provincial health
         care. For a complete picture of the costs of provincial health care, readers should consult the consolidated
         financial statements of the Government of Alberta (GOA).

         Under the Income Tax Act (Canada), AHS is a registered charity.


Note 2 Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices

          (a) Basis of Presentation

              These consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with Canadian Public
              Sector Accounting Standards (PSAS) and the financial directives issued by Alberta Health (AH).

              These consolidated financial statements reflect the assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses of the
              reporting entity, which is comprised of the organizations controlled by AHS as noted below:

             (i)       Controlled Entities

                   AHS controls the following three entities:

                   •    Alberta Public Laboratories Ltd. (APL) (formerly Calgary Lab Services Ltd.) - provides medical
                        diagnostic services throughout Alberta. AHS owns 100% of the Class A voting shares.
                   •    Capital Care Group Inc. (CCGI) - manages continuing care programs and facilities in the Edmonton
                        area. AHS owns 100% of the Class A voting shares.
                   •    Carewest - manages continuing care programs and facilities in the Calgary area. AHS owns 99%
                        of the Class A voting shares and 1% of the Class A voting shares are held in trust for the benefit
                        of AHS by the Chair of the Board of Directors.




68                                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                  Financial Information



Note 2 Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

              AHS has majority representation on, or the right to appoint, the governance boards indicating
              control of the following entities:

               •   Foundations:
                   Airdrie Health Foundation                           Lacombe Health Trust
                   Alberta Cancer Foundation                           Medicine Hat and District Health Foundation
                   American Friends of the Calgary Health Trust        Mental Health Foundation
                    Foundation                                         North County Health Foundation
                   Bassano and District Health Foundation              Oyen and District Health Care Foundation
                   Bow Island and District Health Foundation           Peace River and District Health Foundation
                   Brooks and District Health Foundation               Ponoka and District Health Foundation
                   Calgary Health Trust                                Rocky Mountain House & Area Health Services
                   Canmore and Area Health Care Foundation              Foundation
                   Cardston and District Health Foundation             Stettler Health Services Foundation
                   Claresholm and District Health Foundation           Strathcona Community Hospital Foundation
                   Crowsnest Pass Health Foundation                    Tofield and Area Health Services Foundation
                   David Thompson Health Trust (inactive)              Two Hills Health Centre Foundation
                   Fort Macleod and District Health Foundation         Vermillion and Region Health and Wellness
                   Fort Saskatchewan Community Hospital Foundation      Foundation (inactive)
                   Grande Cache Hospital Foundation                    Viking Health Foundation
                   Grimshaw/Berwyn and District Hospital Foundation    Vulcan County Health and Wellness Foundation
                   Jasper Health Care Foundation                       Windy Slopes Health Foundation
                   Lac La Biche Regional Health Foundation

               •   Provincial Health Authorities of Alberta Liability and Property Insurance Plan (LPIP)

               •   Queen Elizabeth II Hospital Child Care Centre

               All inter-entity accounts and transactions between these organizations and AHS are eliminated upon
               consolidation.

             (ii) Government Partnerships

               AHS proportionately consolidates its 50% interests in Primary Care Network (PCN) partnerships with
               physician groups, its 50% interest in the Northern Alberta Clinical Trials Centre (NACTRC)
               partnership with the University of Alberta, and its 33.33% interest in the Institute for Reconstructive
               Sciences in Medicine (iRSM) partnership with the University of Alberta and Covenant Health (Note
               22).

               AHS entered into local primary care initiative agreements to jointly manage and operate the delivery
               of primary care services, to achieve the PCN plan objectives, and to contract and hold property
               interests required in the delivery of PCN services.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                      69
Financial Information



Note 2     Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

              The following PCNs are included in these consolidated financial statements on a proportionate basis:

              Alberta Heartland Primary Care Network              Lloydminster Primary Care Network
              Aspen Primary Care Network                          McLeod River Primary Care Network
              Big Country Primary Care Network                    Mosaic Primary Care Network
              Bighorn Primary Care Network                        Northwest Primary Care Network
              Bonnyville Primary Care Network                     Palliser Primary Care Network
              Bow Valley Primary Care Network                     Peace Region Primary Care Network
              Calgary Foothills Primary Care Network              Peaks to Prairies Primary Care Network
              Calgary Rural Primary Care Network                  Provost Primary Care Network
              Calgary West Central Primary Care Network           Red Deer Primary Care Network
              Camrose Primary Care Network                        Rocky Mountain House Primary Care Network
              Chinook Primary Care Network                        Saddle Hills Primary Care Network (formerly
              Cold Lake Primary Care Network                       Sexsmith / Spirit River Primary Care Network
              Drayton Valley Primary Care Network                  and West Peace Region Primary Care Network)
              Edmonton North Primary Care Network                 Sherwood Park/Strathcona County Primary Care
              Edmonton Oliver Primary Care Network                 Network
              Edmonton Southside Primary Care Network             South Calgary Primary Care Network
              Edmonton West Primary Care Network                  St. Albert & Sturgeon Primary Care Network
              Grande Prairie Primary Care Network                 Wainwright Primary Care Network
              Highland Primary Care Network                       WestView Primary Care Network
              Kalyna Country Primary Care Network                 Wetaskiwin and Area Primary Care Network
              Lakeland Primary Care Network                       Wolf Creek Primary Care Network
              Leduc Beaumont Devon Primary Care Network           Wood Buffalo Primary Care Network


              All inter-entity accounts and transactions between these organizations and AHS are eliminated upon
              consolidation.

             (iii) Trusts under Administration

                   These consolidated financial statements do not include trusts administered on behalf of others
                   (Note 23). AHS provides services to certain entities not included in these consolidated financial
                   statements.

             (iv) Other

                   AHS is responsible for the delivery and operation of the public health system in Alberta (Note 1),
                   and contracts with various voluntary and private health service providers to provide health services
                   throughout the province. The largest of these service providers is Covenant Health, a
                   denominational health care organization, providing a full spectrum of care. Covenant Health is an
                   independent, separate legal entity with a separate Board of Directors and accordingly, these
                   financial statements do not include their assets, liabilities or results of operations. However, the
                   payments for contracts with health service providers such as Covenant Health are recorded as
                   expenses in the statement of operations.

          (b) Revenue Recognition

                   Revenue is recognized in the period in which the transactions or events that give rise to the revenue
                   as described below occur. All revenue is recorded on an accrual basis, except when the accrual
                   cannot be determined within a reasonable degree of certainty or when estimation is impracticable.

             (i)   Government Transfers

                   Transfers from AH, other GOA ministries and agencies, and other government entities are referred
                   to as government transfers.




70                                                                                     Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                      Financial Information



Note 2    Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

                 Government transfers and the associated externally restricted investment income are recorded as
                 deferred revenue if the eligibility criteria for the use of the transfer, or the stipulations together with
                 AHS’ actions and communications as to the use of the transfer, create a liability. These transfers are
                 recognized as revenue as the stipulations are met and, when applicable, AHS complies with its
                 communicated use of the transfer.

                 All other government transfers, without stipulations for the use of the transfer, are recorded as
                 revenue when the transfer is authorized and AHS meets the eligibility criteria.

                 Deferred revenue consists of unexpended deferred operating revenue, unexpended deferred capital
                 revenue, and expended deferred capital revenue. The term deferred revenue in these consolidated
                 financial statements refers to the components of deferred revenue as described.

                 Unallocated costs, which excludes land and buildings, comprising of materials and services
                 contributed by related parties in support of AHS’ operations, are not recognized in these consolidated
                 financial statements.

             (ii) Donations, Fundraising, and Non-Government Contributions

                 Donations, fundraising, and non-government contributions are received from individuals,
                 corporations, and other not-for-profit organizations. Donations, fundraising, and non-government
                 contributions may be unrestricted or externally restricted for operating or capital purposes.

                 Unrestricted donations, fundraising, and non-government contributions are recorded as revenue in
                 the year received or in the year the funds are committed to AHS if the amount can be reasonably
                 estimated and collection is reasonably assured.

                 Externally restricted donations, fundraising, non-government contributions, and the associated
                 externally restricted investment income are recorded as deferred revenue if the terms for their use,
                 or the terms along with AHS’ actions and communications as to their use create a liability. These
                 resources are recognized as revenue as the terms are met and, when applicable, AHS complies
                 with its communicated use.

                 In-kind donations of services and materials from non-related parties are recorded at fair value when
                 such value can reasonably be determined. While volunteers contribute a significant amount of time
                 each year to assist AHS, the value of their services is not recognized as revenue and expenses in
                 the consolidated financial statements because fair value cannot be reasonably determined.

             (iii) Transfers and Donations related to Land

                 Transfers and donations for the purchase of land are recognized as deferred revenue when received
                 and as revenue when the land is purchased.

             (iv) Fees and Charges, Ancillary Operations, and Other Income

                 Fees and charges, ancillary operations, and other income are recognized in the period that goods
                 are delivered or services are provided. Amounts received for which goods or services have not been
                 provided by year end are recorded as deferred revenue.

             (v) Investment Income

                 Investment income includes dividend income, interest income, and realized gains or losses on the
                 sale of portfolio investments. Unrealized gains and losses on portfolio investments exclusive of
                 restricted transfers or donations are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Remeasurement
                 Gains and Losses until the related investments are sold. When realized, these gains or losses are
                 recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. Investment income and unrealized gains
                 and losses from restricted transfers or donations are allocated to their respective balances according
                 to the provisions within the individual agreements.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                          71
Financial Information



Note 2 Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

          (c) Expenses

              Expenses are reported on an accrual basis. The cost of all goods consumed and services received during
              the year are expensed. Interest expense includes debt servicing costs.

              Expenses include grants and transfers under shared cost agreements. Grants and transfers are
              recorded as expenses when the transfer is authorized and eligibility criteria have been met by the
              recipient.

          (d) Financial Instruments

              All of AHS’ financial assets and liabilities are initially recorded at their fair value. The following table
              identifies AHS’ financial assets and liabilities and identifies how they are subsequently measured:

                    Financial Assets and
                    Liabilities                        Subsequent Measurement and Recognition
                    Cash and investments               Measured at fair value with unrealized changes in fair values recognized in
                                                       the Consolidated Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses or
                                                       deferred revenue until realized, at which time the cumulative changes in fair
                                                       value are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Operations.

                    Accounts receivable, accrued       Measured at amortized cost.
                    vacation pay, accounts payable
                    and accrued liabilities and debt

              PSAS requires investments in equity instruments quoted in an active market to be recorded under the
              fair value category and AHS may choose to record other financial assets under the fair value category
              if there is an investment strategy to evaluate the performance of a group of these financial assets on a
              fair value basis. AHS has elected to record its money market securities, fixed income securities, and
              certain other equity investments at fair value. The three levels of information that may be used to
              measure fair value are:

                •   Level 1 – Unadjusted quoted market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities;
                •   Level 2 – Observable or corroborated inputs, other than level 1, such as quoted prices for similar
                    assets or liabilities in inactive markets or market data for substantially the full term of the assets or
                    liabilities; and
                •   Level 3 – Unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and that are
                    significant to the fair value of the assets and liabilities.

              AHS measures and recognizes embedded derivatives separately from the host contract when the
              economic characteristics and risk of the embedded derivative are not closely related to those of the host
              contract, when it meets the definition of a derivative and, when the entire contract is not measured at
              fair value.

              Derivatives are recorded at fair value in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. Derivatives
              with a positive or negative fair value are recognized as increases or decreases to investments.
              Unrealized gains and losses from changes in the fair value of derivatives are recognized in the
              Consolidated Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses.

              All financial assets are assessed for impairment on an annual basis. When a decline is determined to
              be other than temporary, the amount of the loss is reported as a realized loss on the Consolidated
              Statement of Operations.

              Transaction costs associated with the acquisition and disposal of investments are expensed as incurred.
              Investment management fees are expensed as incurred. The purchase and sale of investments are
              accounted for using trade date accounting.




72                                                                                              Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                      Financial Information



Note 2 Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

         (e) Cash

               Cash is comprised of cash on hand. Cash on hand is held for the purpose of meeting short-term
               commitments rather than for investment purposes

         (f)   Inventories For Consumption

               Inventories for consumption or distribution at no charge are valued at lower of cost (defined as moving
               average cost) and replacement cost.

         (g) Tangible Capital Assets

               Tangible capital assets and work in progress are recorded at cost, which includes amounts that are
               directly related to the acquisition, design, construction, development, improvement, or betterment of the
               assets. Cost includes overhead directly attributable to construction and development as well as interest
               costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition or construction of the asset. Costs incurred by
               Alberta Infrastructure (AI) to build tangible capital assets on behalf of AHS are recorded by AHS as work
               in progress as AI incurs costs.

               Contributed tangible capital assets from non-related entities are recognized at their fair value at the date
               of the contribution when fair value can be reasonably determined. When AHS cannot determine the fair
               value, it records such contributions at nominal value.

               The costs less residual values of tangible capital assets, excluding land, are amortized over their
               estimated useful lives on a straight-line basis as follows:
                                                                           Useful Life
                     Facilities and improvements                           10-40 years
                     Equipment                                             3-20 years
                     Information systems                                   3-10 years
                     Building service equipment                            5-40 years
                     Land improvements                                     5-40 years

               Work in progress, which includes facility and improvement projects and development of information
               systems, is not amortized until after a project is substantially complete and the tangible capital assets
               are available for use.

               Leases transferring substantially all benefits and risks of tangible capital asset ownership are classified
               as capital leases and reported as tangible capital assets. Capital leases and leasehold improvements
               are amortized over the term of the lease. Capital lease obligations associated with these capital leases
               are recorded at the present value of the minimum lease payments excluding executory costs (e.g.
               insurance, maintenance costs, etc.) and reported as obligations under capital leases. The discount rate
               used to determine the present value of the lease payments is the lower of AHS’ rate for incremental
               borrowing and the interest rate implicit in the lease.

               Tangible capital assets are written down when conditions indicate that they no longer contribute to AHS’
               ability to provide goods and services or when the value of future economic benefits associated with the
               tangible capital assets are less than their net book value. Net write-downs are accounted for as
               expenses in the Consolidated Statement of Operations.

               Works of art, historical treasures, and collections are not recognized in tangible capital assets.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                         73
Financial Information



Note 2     Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

          (h) Employee Future Benefits

             (i)   Registered Benefit Pension Plans

                   AHS participates in the following registered defined benefit pension plans: the Local Authorities
                   Pension Plan (LAPP) and the Management Employees Pension Plan (MEPP). These multi-employer
                   public sector defined benefit plans provide pensions for participants for each year of pensionable
                   service based on the average salary of the highest five consecutive years, up to the average Canada
                   Pension Plan’s Year’s Maximum Pensionable Earnings (YMPE), over the same five consecutive
                   year period. Benefits for post-1991 service payable under these plans are limited by the Income Tax
                   Act (Canada). Prior to March 1, 2019, the President of Alberta Treasury Board and Minister of
                   Finance was the legal trustee and administrator for LAPP and MEPP. Although there has been no
                   change in MEPP governance, effective March 1, 2019, LAPP Corporation became the legislated
                   administrator and trustee of LAPP. As a participating government organization, AHS accounts for
                   these plans on a defined contribution basis. Accordingly, the pension expense recorded for these
                   plans in these consolidated financial statements is comprised of the employer contributions that AHS
                   is required to pay for its employees during the fiscal year, which are calculated based on actuarially
                   pre-determined amounts that are expected to provide the plan’s future benefits.

             (ii) Other Defined Contribution Pension Plans

                   AHS sponsors Group Registered Retirement Savings Plans (GRRSPs) for certain employee groups.
                   Under the GRRSPs, AHS matches a certain percentage of any contribution made by plan
                   participants up to certain limits. AHS also sponsors a defined contribution pension plan for certain
                   employee groups where the employee and employer each contribute specified percentages of
                   pensionable earnings.

             (iii) Supplemental Retirement Plan for Designated Employees (SERP)

                   The SERP covers certain employees and supplements the benefits under AHS’ registered plans
                   that are limited by the Income Tax Act (Canada). The SERP has been closed to new entrants since
                   April 1, 2009. The SERP provides future pension benefits to participants based on years of service
                   and earnings.

                   As required under the Income Tax Act (Canada), approximately half of the assets are held in a non-
                   interest bearing Refundable Tax Account with the Canada Revenue Agency. The remaining assets
                   of the SERP are invested in a combination of Canadian equities and Canadian fixed income
                   securities.

                   The obligations and related costs of SERP benefits are determined annually through an actuarial
                   valuation as at March 31 using the projected benefit method pro-rated on service. AHS uses a
                   discount rate based on plan asset earnings to calculate the accrued benefit obligation.

                   The net SERP retirement benefit cost reported in these consolidated financial statements is
                   comprised of the retirement benefits expense and the retirement benefits interest expense. Costs
                   shown reflect the total estimated cost to provide annual pension income over an actuarially
                   determined post-employment period. The key components of retirement benefits expense include
                   the cost of any plan amendments including related net actuarial gains or losses incurred in the
                   period, gains and losses from any plan settlements or curtailments incurred in the period, and
                   amortization of actuarial gains and losses. Retirement benefit costs are not cash payments in the
                   period but are the period expense for rights to future compensation. The retirement benefits interest
                   expense is net of the interest cost on the accrued benefit obligation and the expected return on plan
                   assets.

                   AHS amortizes actuarial gains and losses over the average remaining service life of the related
                   employee group.




74                                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                       Financial Information



Note 2 Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

                   Prior period service costs arising from plan amendments are recognized in the period of the plan
                   amendment. When an employee’s accrued benefit obligation is fully discharged, all unrecognized
                   amounts associated with that employee are fully recognized in the net retirement benefit cost in the
                   following year.

               (iv) Supplemental Pension Plan (SPP)

                   Subsequent to April 1, 2009, staff that would have otherwise been eligible for SERP have been
                   enrolled in a defined contribution SPP. The SPP supplements the benefits under AHS registered
                   plans that are limited by the Income Tax Act (Canada). AHS contributes a percentage of an eligible
                   employee’s pensionable earnings, in excess of the limits of the Income Tax Act (Canada). The SPP
                   provides participants with an account balance at retirement based on the contributions made to the
                   plan and investment income earned on the contributions based on investment decisions made by
                   the participant.

               (v) Sick Leave Liability

                   Sick leave benefits accumulate with employees’ service and are provided by AHS to certain
                   employee groups of AHS, as defined by employment agreements, to cover illness related absences
                   that are outside of short-term and long-term disability coverage. Benefit amounts are determined
                   and accumulate with reference to employees’ final earnings at the time they are paid out. The cost
                   of the accumulating non-vesting sick leave benefits is expensed as the benefits are earned.

                   AHS accrues its liabilities for accumulating non-vesting sick leave benefits but does not record a
                   liability for sick leave benefits that do not accumulate beyond the current reporting period as these
                   are renewed annually.

                   The accumulating non-vesting sick leave liability is actuarially determined using the projected benefit
                   method pro-rated for service and management's best estimates of expected discount rate, inflation,
                   rate of compensation increase, termination and retirement rates, and mortality. The liability
                   associated with these benefits is calculated as the present value of expected future payments pro-
                   rated for service.

                   Any resulting net actuarial gain (loss) is deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis over the
                   expected average remaining service life of the related employee groups.

               (vi) Other Benefits

                   AHS provides its employees with basic life, accidental death and dismemberment, short-term
                   disability, long-term disability, extended health, dental, and vision benefits through benefits carriers.
                   AHS fully accrues its obligations for employee non-pension future benefits.

         (i)   Liability for Contaminated Sites

                   Contaminated sites are a result of contamination being introduced into air, soil, water, or sediment
                   of a chemical, organic or radioactive material or live organism that exceeds an environmental
                   standard. A liability for remediation of contaminated sites is recognized when all of the following
                   criteria are met:

                        (i)     an environmental standard exists;
                        (ii)    contamination exceeds the environmental standard;
                        (iii)   AHS is directly responsible or accepts responsibility;
                        (iv)    it is expected that future economic benefits will be given up; and
                        (v)     a reasonable estimate of the amount can be made.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                          75
Financial Information



Note 2 Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

          (j)   Foreign Currency Translation

                Transaction amounts denominated in foreign currencies are translated into their Canadian dollar
                equivalents at exchange rates prevailing at the transaction dates. Carrying values of monetary assets
                and liabilities and non-monetary items included in the fair value category reflect the exchange rates at
                the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position date. Unrealized foreign exchange gains and losses
                are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses.

                In the period of settlement, foreign exchange gains and losses are reclassified to the Consolidated
                Statement of Operations, and the cumulative amount of remeasurement gains and losses are reversed
                in the Consolidated Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses.

          (k) Internally Restricted Surplus for Future Purposes

                Certain amounts, as approved by the AHS Board, are set aside in accumulated surplus for use by AHS
                for future operating and capital purposes, to meet legislative insurance equity requirements and to
                recognize certain donor commitments by AHS’ controlled foundations. Transfers to, or from, internally
                restricted surplus for future purposes are recorded to the respective surplus account when approved.

          (l)   Measurement Uncertainty

                The consolidated financial statements, by their nature, contain estimates and are subject to
                measurement uncertainty. Measurement uncertainty exists when there is a difference between the
                recognized or disclosed amount and another reasonably possible amount. The amount recorded for
                amortization of tangible capital assets is based on the estimated useful life of the related tangible capital
                assets while the recognition of expended deferred capital revenue depends on when the terms for the
                use of the funding are met and, when applicable, AHS complies with its communicated use of the
                funding. The amounts recorded for employee future benefits are based on estimated future cash flows.
                The provision for unpaid claims, allowance for doubtful accounts and accrued liabilities are subject to
                significant management estimates and assumptions. The establishment of the provision for unpaid
                claims relies on the judgment and opinions of many individuals; historical precedent and trends;
                prevailing legal, economic, social, and regulatory trends; and expectation as to future developments.
                The process of determining the provision necessarily involves risks that the actual results will deviate
                perhaps materially from the best estimates made. These estimates and assumptions are reviewed at
                least annually. Actual results could differ from the estimates determined by management in these
                consolidated financial statements, and these differences, which may be material, could require
                adjustment in subsequent reporting periods.

          (m) Changes in Accounting Policy
              AHS has prospectively adopted the following accounting standard as of April 1, 2018:

                PS 3430 – Restructuring Transactions

                PS 3430 provides guidance on how to account for and report restructuring transactions by both
                transferors and recipients of assets and/or liabilities, together with related programs or operating
                responsibilities. The adoption of this standard did not have any impact on AHS’ consolidated financial
                statements.

          (n) Future Accounting Changes
              The following accounting standards are applicable in future years:

                •   PS 3280 – Asset Retirement Obligations (effective April 1, 2021)
                    PS 3280 provides guidance on how to account for and report a liability for retirement of a tangible
                    capital asset.

                •   PS 3400 – Revenue (effective April 1, 2022)
                    PS 3400 provides guidance on how to account for and report revenue.

                AHS is currently assessing what the impact of these new standards will have on future consolidated
                financial statements.



76                                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                 Financial Information



Note 3    Budget

          The AHS Health Plan and Business Plan, which included the 2018-19 annual budget, was approved by the
          AHS Board on May 31, 2018 and by the Minister of Health on October 3, 2018.

Note 4    Other Government Transfers

                                                                     Budget           2019              2018
     Unrestricted operating                                     $       31,000   $     32,790      $      38,571
     Restricted operating (Note 14)                                    115,000        114,269            112,460
     Recognition of expended deferred capital revenue                  281,000        282,606            287,096
      (Note 16)
                                                                $      427,000   $    429,665      $      438,127

          Other government transfers include $420,622 (2018 – $429,855) transferred from the GOA, $9,043 (2018
          – $8,272) from government entities outside the GOA, and exclude amounts from AH as these amounts are
          separately disclosed on the Consolidated Statement of Operations.

Note 5    Donations, Fundraising, and Non-Government Contributions

                                                                     Budget           2019              2018
     Unrestricted operating                                     $        3,000   $      4,073      $       2,281
     Restricted operating (Note 14)                                    119,000        126,961            126,311
     Recognition of expended deferred capital revenue                   27,000         35,695             31,156
      (Note 16)
     Endowment contributions and reinvested income                           -            463                 328
                                                                $      149,000   $    167,192      $      160,076

Note 6    Investment and Other Income

                                                                     Budget           2019              2018
     Investment income                                          $       68,000   $     68,521      $      69,215
     Other income:
        GOA (Note 21)                                                   31,000         30,847              32,004
        AH                                                              20,000         12,698              16,361
        Other                                                           90,000        120,428             125,233
                                                                $      209,000   $    232,494      $      242,813

Note 7 Support Services
                                                                    Budget           2019               2018
     Facilities operations                                  $         899,000    $    893,598      $     872,817
     Patient: health records, food services, and
      transportation                                                  426,000         424,288             408,825
     Materials management                                             182,000         174,916             176,438
     Housekeeping, laundry, and linen                                 218,000         217,296             211,762
     Support services expense of full-spectrum contracted
      health service providers                                        152,000          154,714            151,616
     Ancillary operations                                             113,000          103,122            110,046
     Fundraising expenses and grants awarded                           54,000           45,689             46,279
     Other                                                            166,000          245,849            244,770
                                                            $       2,210,000    $   2,259,472     $    2,222,553




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                    77
Financial Information



Note 8     Administration

                                                                          Budget                2019              2018
      General administration                                          $     265,000      $        286,312     $   235,338
      Human resources                                                        97,000               116,116         112,776
      Finance                                                                80,000                73,075          76,627
      Communications                                                         28,000                24,415          24,737
      Administration expense of full-spectrum contracted
       health service providers                                               39,000               39,977          40,710
                                                                      $      509,000     $        539,895     $   490,188

Note 9     Financial Risk Management

           AHS is exposed to a variety of financial risks associated with its financial instruments. These financial risks
           include market risk, credit risk, and liquidity risk.

              (a) Market Risk

                  Market risk is the risk that the fair value or future cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate
                  due to changes in market prices. Market risk is comprised of three types of risk: price risk, interest
                  rate risk, and foreign currency risk.

                  In order to earn financial returns at an acceptable level of market risk, the consolidated investment
                  portfolio is governed by an investment bylaw and policies with clearly established target asset mixes.
                  The target assets range between 0% and 100% for cash and money market securities, 0% to 80%
                  for fixed income securities and 0% to 70% for equity holdings.

                  Risk is reduced through asset class diversification, diversification within each asset class, and
                  portfolio quality constraints governing the quality of portfolio holdings.

                  AHS assesses the sensitivity of its portfolio to market risk based on historical volatility of equity and
                  fixed income markets. Volatility is determined using a ten year average based on fixed income and
                  equity market fluctuations and is applied to the total portfolio. Based on the volatility average of
                  2.26% (2018 – 2.85%) increase or decrease, with all other variables held constant, the portfolio
                  could expect an increase or decrease in accumulated remeasurement gains and losses and
                  unrealized net gains and losses attributable to deferred revenue and endowments of $38,130 (2018
                  – $50,819).

                  (i) Price Risk

                        Price risk relates to the possibility that equity investments will change in fair value due to future
                        fluctuations in market prices caused by factors specific to an individual equity investment or other
                        factors affecting all equities traded in the market. AHS is exposed to price risk associated with
                        the underlying equity investments held in pooled funds. If equity market indices (S&P/TSX,
                        S&P1500 and MSCI ACWI and their sectors) declined by 10%, and all other variables are held
                        constant, the potential loss in fair value to AHS would be approximately $50,535 or 2.22% of total
                        investments (March 31, 2018 – $53,428 or 2.31%).

                  (ii) Interest Rate Risk

                        Interest rate risk is the risk that the value of a financial instrument might be adversely affected by
                        a change in market interest rates. AHS manages the interest rate risk exposure of its fixed
                        income investments by management of average duration and laddered maturity dates.

                        AHS is exposed to interest rate risk through its investments in fixed income securities with both
                        fixed and floating interest rates. AHS has fixed interest rate loans for all debt, thereby mitigating
                        interest rate risk from rate fluctuations over the term of the outstanding debt. The fair value of
                        fixed rate debt fluctuates with changes in market interest rates but the related future cash flows
                        will not change.




78                                                                                           Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                      Financial Information



Note 9 Financial Risk Management (continued)

                     In general, investment returns for bonds and mortgage funds are sensitive to changes in the level
                     of interest rates, with longer term interest bearing securities being more sensitive to interest rate
                     changes than shorter term bonds.

                     A 1% change in market yield relating to fixed income securities would have increased or
                     decreased fair value by approximately $78,148 (March 31, 2018 – $71,683).

                     Fixed income securities include bonds and money market securities. The fixed income securities
                     have the following average maturity structure ranging from 2019 and 2067:

                                                                    2019                               2018
                      0 – 5 years                                   77%                                80%
                      6 – 10 years                                   8%                                 8%
                      Over 10 years                                 15%                                12%

                                                             Effective Market Yield                        Average
                                                                                                           Effective
                      Asset Class                 < 1 year          1-5 years          > 5 years
                                                                                                          Market Yield
                      Interest bearing             2.44%              2.05%              2.92%              2.47%
                      securities

                 (iii) Foreign Currency Risk

                     Foreign currency risk is the risk that the fair value of future cash flows of a financial instrument
                     will fluctuate because of changes in foreign exchange rates. The fair value of cash and
                     investments denominated in foreign currencies is translated into Canadian dollars on a daily
                     basis using the reporting date exchange rate. Both the realized gain/loss and remeasurement
                     gain/loss comprise actual gains or losses on the underlying investment as well as changes in
                     foreign exchange rates at the time of the valuation. AHS is exposed to foreign exchange
                     fluctuations on its cash denominated in foreign currencies. AHS is also exposed to changes in
                     the valuation on its global equity pooled funds attributable to fluctuations in foreign currency.

                     Foreign currency risk is managed by the investment policies which limit non-Canadian equities
                     to a maximum of 10% to 45% of the total investment portfolio, depending on the policy. At March
                     31, 2019, investments in non-Canadian equities represented 14.5% (March 31, 2018 – 16.2%)
                     of total portfolio investments.

                     Foreign exchange fluctuations on cash balances are mitigated by forward contracts and holding
                     minimal foreign currency cash balances. At March 31, 2019, AHS held US dollar forward
                     contracts with ATB Financial to manage currency fluctuations relating to its US dollar accounts
                     payable requirements. As at March 31, 2019, AHS held derivatives in the form of forward
                     contracts for future settlement of $18,000 (2018 – $24,000). The fair value of these forward
                     contracts as at March 31, 2019 was $714 (2018 – $461) and is included in investments (Note
                     10).

             (b) Credit Risk

                 Credit risk is the risk of loss arising from the failure of a counterparty to fully honour its contractual
                 obligations. The credit quality of financial assets is generally assessed by reference to external credit
                 ratings. Credit risk can also lead to losses when issuers and debtors are downgraded by credit rating
                 agencies. The investment policies restrict the types and proportions of eligible investments, thus
                 mitigating AHS’ exposure to credit risk.

                 Accounts receivable primarily consists of amounts receivable from AH, other Alberta government
                 reporting entities, patients, other provinces and territories, Workers’ Compensation Board, and the
                 federal government. AHS periodically reviews the collectability of its accounts receivable and
                 establishes an allowance based on its best estimate of potentially uncollectible amounts.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                         79
Financial Information



Note 9 Financial Risk Management (continued)

                  Under the investment bylaw and policies governing the consolidated portfolio, money market
                  securities are limited to a rating of R1 or equivalent or higher, and no more than 10% may be
                  invested in any one issuer unless guaranteed by the Government of Canada or a Canadian province.
                  Investments in corporate bonds are limited to BBB or equivalent rated bonds or higher and no more
                  than 40% of the total fixed income securities. Investments in debt and equity of any one issuer are
                  limited to 5% of the issuer’s total debt and equity. AHS holds unrated mortgage fund investments.
                  Short selling is not permitted.

                  The following table summarizes AHS’ investment in debt securities by counterparty credit rating at
                  March 31, 2019. The unrated securities consist of low volatility pooled mortgages that are not rated
                  on an active market.
                    Credit
                    Rating                                           2019                           2018
                    Investment Grade (AAA to BBB)                     87%                           89%
                    Unrated                                           13%                           11%
                                                                     100%                           100%

              (c) Liquidity Risk

                  Liquidity risk is the risk that AHS will encounter difficulty in meeting obligations associated with
                  financial liabilities that are settled by delivery of cash or another financial asset. Liquidity
                  requirements of AHS are met through funding provided in advance by AH, income generated from
                  investments, and by investing in liquid assets, such as money market investments, equities, and
                  bonds traded in an active market that are easily sold and converted to cash.

Note 10    Investments

                                                                    2019                          2018
                                                          Fair Value         Cost       Fair Value           Cost
 Cash held for investing purposes                        $     110,887 $      110,887 $     118,012 $        118,012

 Interest bearing securities:
   Money market securities                                     177,199         177,199           124,320       124,320
   Fixed income securities                                   1,485,637       1,467,856         1,540,138     1,549,534
                                                             1,662,836       1,645,055         1,664,458     1,673,854

 Equities:
  Canadian equity investments                                   45,866      38,488                24,350      17,477
  Canadian equity funds                                        129,525     119,364               133,680     125,451
  Global equity funds                                          329,954     288,454               376,252     326,465
                                                               505,345     446,306               534,282     469,393
                                                         $   2,279,068 $ 2,202,248 $           2,316,752 $ 2,261,259

                                                                      2019                            2018
 Items at Fair Value
   Portfolio investments designated to the FV            $                   2,232,488     $               2,291,941
    category
   Portfolio investments in equity instruments that
    are quoted in an active market                                              45,866                        24,350
   Derivatives                                                                     714                           461
                                                         $                   2,279,068     $               2,316,752

Included in investments is $212,323 (March 31, 2018 – $173,725) that is restricted for use as per the requirements in
Sections 99 and 100 of the Insurance Act of Alberta. Endowments included in investments amount to $75,157 (March
31, 2018 – $74,694).




80                                                                                    Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                             Financial Information



Note 10   Investments (continued)

The following are the total net remeasurement gains on investments:

                                                                         2019                                      2018
 Accumulated remeasurement gains                               $                          34,469     $                     20,835
 Restricted unrealized net gains attributable to
  unexpended deferred operating revenue and
  endowments (Note 14(b))                                                                 42,351                           34,658
                                                               $                          76,820     $                     55,493

Fair Value Hierarchy

                                                                               2019
                                              Level 1              Level 2                   Level 3                  Total
 Cash held for investing
   purposes                           $           110,887      $                -     $                  -     $           110,887
 Interest bearing securities:
   Money market securities                                 -           177,199                           -                  177,199
   Fixed income securities                                 -         1,320,899                     164,738                1,485,637
 Equities:
   Canadian equity
    investments                                    45,866              129,525                           -                  175,391
   Global equity funds                                  -              329,954                           -                  329,954
                                      $           156,753      $     1,957,577        $            164,738     $          2,279,068
 Percent of total                                     7%                  86%                          7%                     100%

                                                                                2018
                                              Level 1              Level 2                   Level 3                  Total
 Cash held for investing
   purposes                           $           118,012      $                -     $                  -     $           118,012
 Interest bearing securities:
   Money market securities                                 -           124,320                           -                  124,320
   Fixed income securities                                 -         1,393,124                     147,014                1,540,138
 Equities:
   Canadian equity investments                     24,350              133,739                           -                  158,089
   Global equity funds                                  -              376,193                           -                  376,193
                                      $           142,361      $     2,027,377        $            147,014     $          2,316,752
 Percent of total                                     6%                  88%                          6%                     100%


Note 11   Accounts Receivable

                                                                       2019                                               2018
                                                                    Allowance
                                                 Gross             for Doubtful                    Net                    Net
                                                                    Accounts
 Patient accounts receivable              $             127,952           28,440                     99,512 $              105,364
 AH operating transfers receivable                       36,768                 -                    36,768                 81,104
 AH capital transfers receivable                         34,356                 -                    34,356                 38,766
 Other operating transfers
  receivable                                             14,824                   -                  14,824                 30,025
 Other capital transfers receivable                     157,776                   -                 157,776                 86,413
 Other accounts receivable                              102,498                 526                 101,972                 84,886
                                          $             474,174              28,966                 445,208 $              426,558

Accounts receivable are unsecured and non-interest bearing. At March 31, 2018, the total allowance for doubtful
accounts was $25,986.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                                    81
Financial Information



Note 12    Accounts Payable and Accrued Liabilities

                                                                                2019                     2018
                Payroll remittances payable and related accrued
                                                                       $             543,427     $           522,604
                 liabilities
                Trade accounts payable and accrued liabilities                       608,740                 572,282
                Provision for unpaid claims(a)                                       202,511                 157,583
                Obligations under capital leases(b)                                   97,053                 112,675
                Other liabilities                                                     54,142                  47,769
                                                                       $           1,505,873     $         1,412,913

              Accounts payable and accrued liabilities includes payables related to the purchase of tangible capital
              assets of $284,970 (2018 – $268,183).

             (a) Provision for Unpaid Claims is an estimate of liability claims within AHS. It is influenced by factors
                 such as historical trends involving claim payment patterns, pending levels of unpaid claims, claims
                 severity and claim frequency patterns.

                  The provision has been estimated using the discounted value of claim liabilities using a discount
                  rate of 2.45% (2018 – 2.35%) plus a provision for adverse deviation, based on actuarial estimates.

             (b) Obligations under capital leases include a site lease with the University of Calgary, a site lease for
                 the Northern Communications Centre in Peace River, vehicle leases and obligations related to a
                 clinical information system.

                  The obligations expire between 2020 and 2036 and have an implicit interest rate payable ranging
                  from 2.37% to 7.04% (2018 – 2.42% to 6.97%).

                  AHS is committed to making payments for obligations under capital leases as follows:

                               Year ended March 31                              Minimum Contract Payments
                                      2020                                 $               25,758
                                      2021                                                 24,444
                                      2022                                                 23,521
                                      2023                                                 11,504
                                      2024                                                  2,867
                                    Thereafter                                             22,156
                                                                                          110,250
                                    Less: interest                                        (13,197)
                                                                           $               97,053

             (c) Liability for Contaminated Sites

                  At March 31, 2019, AHS has not identified or accepted any liability for contaminated sites (2018 –
                  $nil).




82                                                                                     Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                   Financial Information



Note 13   Employee Future Benefits

                                                                               2019                        2018
               Accrued vacation pay                                     $          566,415         $          553,875
               Accumulating non-vesting sick leave liability(a)                    122,081                    119,261
               Registered defined benefit pension plans(b) (c)                           -                          -
                                                                        $          688,496         $          673,136

             (a) Accumulating Non-Vesting Sick Leave Liability

                 Sick leave benefits are paid by AHS; there are no employee contributions and no assets set aside
                 to support the obligation.

                 The AHS sick leave liability is based on an actuarial valuation as at March 31, 2015 and extrapolated
                 to March 31, 2019.

                 The following table summarizes the accumulating non-vesting sick leave liability.

                                                                                      2019                  2018
               Change in accrued benefit obligation and funded status
                 Accrued benefit obligation and funded status, beginning of     $        99,998        $      115,177
                   year
                 Current service cost                                                      8,498                10,595
                 Interest cost                                                             3,517                 3,779
                 Benefits paid                                                           (8,156)               (8,870)
                 Actuarial gain                                                                -              (20,683)
                 Accrued benefit obligation and funded status, end of
                   year                                                         $       103,857        $       99,998
               Reconciliation to accrued benefit liability
                 Funded status – deficit                                        $       103,857        $       99,998
                 Unamortized net actuarial gain                                          18,224                19,263
                 Accrued benefit liability                                      $       122,081        $      119,261
               Components of expense
                  Current service cost                                          $          8,498       $       10,595
                  Interest cost                                                            3,517                3,779
                  Amortization of net actuarial gain                                     (1,039)                1,267
                  Net expense                                                   $        10,976        $       15,641
               Assumptions
                 Discount rate – beginning of year                                      3.38%                  2.02%
                 Discount rate – end of year                                            3.51%                  3.38%
                 Rate of compensation increase per year                              2018-2019              2017-2018
                                                                                        0.75%                  0.75%
                                                                                     2019-2020              2018-2019
                                                                                        0.75%                  0.75%
                                                                                     Thereafter             Thereafter
                                                                                        2.75%                  2.75%

             (b) Local Authorities Pension Plan (LAPP)

                 (i) AHS Participation in the LAPP

                     The majority of AHS employees participate in the LAPP. AHS is not responsible for future funding
                     of the plan deficit other than through contribution increases. As AHS is exposed to the risk of
                     contribution rate increases, the following disclosure is provided to explain this risk.

                     The LAPP provides for a pension of 1.4% for each year of pensionable service based on the
                     average salary of the highest five consecutive years up to the average Canada Pension Plan’s
                     Year’s Maximum Pensionable Earnings (YMPE), over the same five consecutive year period and
                     2.0% on the excess, subject to the maximum pension benefit limit allowed under the Income Tax
                     Act (Canada). The maximum pensionable service allowable under the plan is 35 years.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                        83
Financial Information



Note 13    Employee Future Benefits (continued)

                  (ii) LAPP Surplus

                        LAPP carried out an actuarial valuation as at December 31, 2016 and these results were then
                        extrapolated to December 31, 2018. The LAPP’s December 31, 2018 net assets available for
                        benefits divided by the LAPP’s pension obligation shows that the LAPP is 108% (2017 – 113%)
                        funded.
                                                                 December 31, 2018          December 31, 2017
                    LAPP net assets available for benefits     $         44,468,547       $         42,728,515
                    LAPP pension obligation                              40,999,200                 37,893,000
                    LAPP surplus                               $          3,469,347       $          4,835,515

                        The 2018 and 2019 LAPP contribution rates are as follows:

                                    Calendar 2019                                    Calendar 2018
                         Employer                Employees                  Employer              Employees
                    9.39% of pensionable 8.39% of pensionable               10.39% of       9.39% of pensionable
                      earnings up to the      earnings up to the      pensionable earnings     earnings up to the
                    YMPE and 13.84% of YMPE and 12.84% of              up to the YMPE and    YMPE and 13.84% of
                         the excess              the excess           14.84% of the excess        the excess

              (c) Pension Expense

                                                                                2019                    2018
                    Local Authorities Pension Plan                     $           556,609     $          587,007
                    Defined contribution pension plans and group
                                                                                     48,408                 49,021
                     RRSPs
                    Supplemental Pension Plan                                         2,265                   2,303
                    Supplemental Executive Retirement Plans                             812                 (1,826)
                    Management Employees Pension Plan                                   378                     393
                                                                       $            608,472    $           636,898




84                                                                                   Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                                   Financial Information



Note 14   Unexpended Deferred Operating Revenue

           (a) Changes in the unexpended deferred operating revenue balance are as follows:

                                                                                2019                                      2018
                                                                           Donors and
                                                                Other
                                                     AH                       Non-                      Total              Total
                                                             Government(i)
                                                                           Government
           Balance, beginning of year          $     137,662  $   26,371 $     256,212 $                  420,245     $      411,079
           Received or receivable during
            the year, net of repayments             1,206,568          59,771           148,795         1,415,134          1,349,839
           Restricted investment income                 1,058           1,611             6,796             9,465              7,176
           Transferred from unexpended
            deferred capital revenue                     3,407          53,127               703            57,237             44,874
           Recognized as revenue                   (1,192,862)       (114,269)         (126,961)       (1,434,092)        (1,373,254)
           Miscellaneous other revenue
            recognized                                 (1,271)            (17)          (21,175)          (22,463)          (21,316)
                                                      154,562          26,594           264,370           445,526           418,398
           Changes in unrealized net gains
            attributable to portfolio
            investments related to
            endowments and unexpended
            deferred operating revenue                    740           2,985             3,968             7,693              1,847
             Balance, end of year          $          155,302    $     29,579 $         268,338    $      453,219     $      420,245

                  (i) The balance at March 31, 2019 for other government includes $506 of unexpended deferred

                  operating revenue received from government entities outside the GOA (March 31, 2018 – $506). The
                  remaining balance in other government all relates to the GOA, see Note 21.

           (b) The unexpended deferred operating revenue balance at the end of the year is externally restricted for
               the following purposes:

                                                                      2019                                                2018
                                                                         Donors and
                                                              Other
                                                   AH                       Non-                       Total              Total
                                                            Government
                                                                         Government
            Research and education        $         23,478 $      1,554 $    157,731 $                   182,763 $           171,295
            Physician revenue and
             alternate relationship plans           36,724               346                  -           37,070              39,658
            Primary Care Networks                   24,354                 -                  -           24,354              27,332
            Long term care partnerships                  -            18,329                  -           18,329              16,735
            Promotion, prevention and
             community                              13,354             1,665               758            15,777              16,373
            Addiction and mental health             31,129                 -               539            31,668              16,252
            Cancer prevention,
             screening and treatment                  5,863                 -            1,096             6,959              14,198
            Administration and support
             services                                2,497             1,268            54,500            58,265              55,090
            Others less than $10,000                16,787             3,432            15,464            35,683              28,654
                                                   154,186            26,594           230,088           410,868             385,587
            Unrealized net gain
             attributable to portfolio
             investments related to
             endowments and
             unexpended deferred
             operating revenue (Note
             10)                                     1,116             2,985            38,250            42,351              34,658
                                           $       155,302 $          29,579 $         268,338 $         453,219 $           420,245




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                                        85
Financial Information



Note 15    Unexpended Deferred Capital Revenue

             (a) Changes in the unexpended deferred capital revenue balance are as follows:

                                                                        2019                                     2018
                                                                            Donors and
                                                                Other
                                              AH                               Non-              Total           Total
                                                             Government(i)
                                                                           Government
               Balance, beginning of
                 year                    $         48,336 $         8,858 $        96,557 $        153,751 $          137,806
               Received or receivable
                during the year                   141,144         169,246          87,927          398,317            306,947
               Other transfers                        (18)             18               -                -                  -
               Unexpended deferred
                capital revenue
                returned                            (242)                -             (8)             (250)           (7,381)
               Transfer to
                expended deferred
                capital revenue               (131,951)          (118,822)        (36,928)        (287,701)        (238,399)
               Transferred to
                 unexpended deferred
                 operating revenue(ii)            (3,407)         (53,127)          (703)          (57,237)           (44,874)
                                                  53,862             6,173        146,845          206,880            154,099
               Changes in unrealized
                net gain on portfolio
                investments related to
                unexpended deferred
                capital revenue                         -               -               -                -              (348)
               Balance, end of year      $         53,862 $         6,173 $       146,845 $        206,880 $          153,751

                  (i) The balance at March 31, 2019 for other government all relates to the GOA, see Note 21.
                  (ii) The transfer mainly comprises restricted funding related to capital expenditures that do not meet

                  AHS’ capitalization criteria.

              (b) The unexpended deferred capital revenue balance at the end of the year is externally restricted for
                  the following purposes:

                                                                                      2019                     2018
               AH
                Information systems                                          $                16,712     $            42,132
                Medical Equipment Replacement Upgrade                                              2                     147
                 Program
                Diagnostic Equipment                                                          19,585                       -
                Other equipment                                                               17,563                   6,057
               Total AH                                                                       53,862                  48,336


               Other government
                Facilities and improvements                                                    6,173                   8,858
               Total other government                                                          6,173                   8,858

               Donors and non-government
                Equipment                                                                    138,334               92,626
                Facilities and improvements                                                    8,511                3,931
               Total donors and non-government                                               146,845               96,557
                                                                              $              206,880     $        153,751




86                                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                    Financial Information



Note 16   Expended Deferred Capital Revenue

          Changes in the expended deferred capital revenue balance are as follows:

                                                                  2019                                            2018
                                                                     Donors and
                                                         Other
                                               AH                (i)    Non-                   Total              Total
                                                      Government
                                                                     Government
             Balance, beginning of year     $ 273,582 $ 6,270,765 $      191,107             $ 6,735,454     $ 6,549,770
             Transferred from
               unexpended deferred
               capital revenue                  131,951      118,822          36,928            287,701            238,399
             Contributed tangible
              capital assets                          -      285,322                 46         285,368            331,622
             Less: amounts recognized
               as revenue                     (65,104)      (282,606)        (35,695)          (383,405)       (384,337)
             Balance, end of year           $ 340,429     $ 6,392,303   $    192,386         $ 6,925,118     $ 6,735,454

                  (i) The balance at March 31, 2019 for other government includes $36 of expended deferred capital

                  revenue received from government entities outside the GOA (March 31, 2018 – $52). The remaining
                  balance in other government all relates to the GOA, see Note 21.


Note 17   Debt

                                                                            2019                           2018
                 Debentures payable(a):
                    Parkade loan #1                             $                   26,500      $                  29,424
                    Parkade loan #2                                                 25,522                         27,951
                    Parkade loan #3                                                 34,048                         36,630
                    Parkade loan #4                                                132,577                        140,098
                    Parkade loan #5                                                 32,200                         33,938
                    Parkade loan #6                                                 22,557                         23,505
                    Parkade loan #7                                                 49,516                         51,500
                    Energy savings initiative loan                                  24,089                         25,800
                 Other                                                                 633                            929
                                                                                   347,642                        369,775

             (a) AHS issued debentures to Alberta Capital Financing Authority (ACFA), a related party, to finance
                 the construction of parkades. AHS has pledged revenue derived directly or indirectly from the
                 operations of all parking facilities being built, renovated, owned, and operated by AHS as security
                 for these debentures.

                  AHS issued a debenture to ACFA relating to an energy savings initiative. AHS has pledged the
                  mortgage on the Royal Alexandra Lands and Alberta Hospital Lands as security for this debenture.

                  AHS is in compliance with all performance requirements of its debenture loans. The maturity dates
                  and interest rates for the debentures are as follows:

                                                                      Maturity Date              Fixed Interest Rate
               Parkade loan #1                                   September 2026                      4.4025%
               Parkade loan #2                                   September 2027                      4.3870%
               Parkade loan #3                                   March 2029                          4.9150%
               Parkade loan #4                                   September 2031                      4.9250%
               Parkade loan #5                                   June 2032                           4.2280%
               Parkade loan #6                                   December 2035                       3.6090%
               Parkade loan #7                                   March 2038                          2.6400%
               Energy savings initiative loan                    December 2030                       2.4160%
               Other                                             March 2021                          4.6000%




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                            87
Financial Information



Note 17    Debt (continued)

              (b) At March 31, 2019, AHS had entered into an agreement to borrow $157,000 from ACFA. The
                  proceeds will be received by AHS in December 2019 for the construction of the Calgary Cancer
                  Center parkade. The loan matures March 2059 and has a fixed interest rate of 3.6%. Semi-annual
                  principal and interest payments of $3,719 will commence June 2020. Commitments related to this
                  agreement have been included in the table below.

                  AHS is committed to making payments as follows:

                                                                   Debentures Payable and Other Loans Payable
                            Year ended March 31                                Principal Payments
                                   2020                           $                    23,091
                                   2021                                                25,893
                                   2022                                                26,666
                                   2023                                                27,810
                                   2024                                                29,008
                                 Thereafter                                           372,174
                                                                  $                   504,642

                  During the year, the total interest related to debt was $15,199 (2018 – $14,551).

                  As at March 31, 2019, AHS holds a $220,000 (March 31, 2018 - $220,000) revolving demand facility
                  with a Canadian chartered bank which may be used for operating purposes. Draws on the facility
                  bear interest at the bank's prime rate less 0.50% per annum. As at March 31, 2019, AHS has $nil
                  (March 31, 2018 - $nil) draws against this facility.

                  AHS also has access to a $33,000 (March 31, 2018 – $33,000) revolving demand letter of credit
                  facility which may be used to secure AHS’ obligations to third parties. At March 31, 2019, AHS has
                  $4,419 (March 31, 2018 – $4,790) in a letter of credit outstanding against this facility. AHS is in
                  compliance with performance requirements relating to this letter of credit.




88                                                                                    Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                                           Financial Information



Note 18    Tangible Capital Assets


                                                                                                Disposals/write-
          Cost               2018         Additions(a)               Transfers                                                  2019
                                                                                                    downs

  Facilities and
                          $ 9,300,463     $                 -        $        108,258           $              (7,331)     $    9,401,390
   improvements
  Work in progress          1,179,069              692,879                   (246,007)                               -          1,625,941
  Equipment(b)              2,512,888              164,704                       (923)                       (115,513)          2,561,156
  Information
                            1,438,547                  21,742                  46,064                         (31,550)          1,474,803
   systems
  Building service
                                648,352                     -                  81,747                            (555)           729,544
   equipment
  Land(c)                       116,875                     -                           -                         (52)           116,823
  Leased facilities
   and                          229,065                     -                       809                              -           229,874
   improvements
  Land
                                 84,197                     -                  10,052                             (61)             94,188
   improvements
                          $ 15,509,456    $        879,325       $                  -       $                (155,062) $       16,233,719



    Accumulated                                    Amortization                    Effect of            Disposals/write
                                 2018                                                                                           2019
    Amortization                                    Expense                        Transfers                -downs

  Facilities and
                            $     3,666,479        $        255,001            $                    -    $     (6,305)     $    3,915,175
   improvements
  Work in progress                        -                       -                                 -                -                  -
  Equipment(b)                    1,898,695                 148,701                                 -        (113,863)          1,933,533
  Information systems             1,277,120                  75,320                                 -         (31,546)          1,320,894
  Building service
                                    398,200                     36,884                              -            (553)           434,531
   equipment
  Land(c)                                  -                             -                          -                -                   -
  Leased facilities and
                                    172,370                      7,361                              -                -           179,731
   improvements
  Land improvements                  65,285                   3,627                                 -             (61)             68,851
                            $     7,478,149        $        526,894            $                    -    $   (152,328)     $    7,852,715


                                                                                     Net Book Value
                                                                2019                                               2018
  Facilities and improvements                  $                               5,486,215            $                           5,633,984
  Work in progress                                                             1,625,941                                        1,179,069
  Equipment(b)                                                                   627,623                                          614,193
  Information systems                                                            153,909                                          161,427
  Building service equipment                                                     295,013                                          250,152
  Land(c)                                                                        116,823                                          116,875
  Leased facilities and improvements                                              50,143                                           56,695
  Land improvements                                                               25,337                                           18,912
                                               $                               8,381,004            $                           8,031,307




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                                             89
Financial Information



Note 18      Tangible Capital Assets (continued)

                                                                  Transfers out of
                Cost                      2017       Additions(a)     Work in                   Disposals               2018
                                                                     Progress
  Facilities and improvements       $ 8,996,755      $      3,646 $       304,041               $    (3,979)        $    9,300,463
  Work in progress                      914,106           681,588       (416,625)                          -             1,179,069
  Equipment(b)                        2,302,819           248,781           1,640                   (40,352)             2,512,888
  Information systems                 1,362,656            10,568          68,023                    (2,700)             1,438,547
  Building service equipment            611,021                 -          37,391                       (60)               648,352
  Land(c)                               110,589             6,286                -                         -               116,875
  Leased facilities and
                                           224,968                  -                 4,097                 -             229,065
   improvements
  Land improvements                         82,764                  -                 1,433                 -              84,197
                                    $ 14,605,678     $    950,869       $                       $ (47,091)          $
                                                                            -                                           15,509,456



                                                     Amortization               Effect of
     Accumulated Amortization             2017                                                  Disposals                2018
                                                      Expense                   Transfers

  Facilities and improvements       $ 3,412,872      $     257,586              $           -   $     (3,979)       $    3,666,479
  Work in progress                            -                  -                          -               -                    -
  Equipment(b)                        1,802,535            136,123                          -        (39,963)            1,898,695
  Information systems                 1,180,818             99,000                          -         (2,698)            1,277,120
  Building service equipment            365,016             33,244                          -            (60)              398,200
  Land(c)                                     -                  -                          -               -                    -
  Leased facilities and
                                           162,322           10,048                         -                   -         172,370
   improvements
  Land improvements                      63,038              2,247                          -               -               65,285
                                    $ 6,986,601      $     538,248              $           -   $    (46,700)       $    7,478,149


                                                                                Net Book Value
                                                           2018                                          2017
     Facilities and improvements             $                          5,633,984       $                                5,583,883
     Work in progress                                                   1,179,069                                          914,106
     Equipment(b)                                                         614,193                                          500,284
     Information systems                                                  161,427                                          181,838
     Building service equipment                                           250,152                                          246,005
     Land(c)                                                              116,875                                          110,589
     Leased facilities and improvements                                    56,695                                           62,646
     Land improvements                                                     18,912                                           19,726
                                             $                          8,031,307       $                                7,619,077

               (a) Contributed Tangible Capital Assets

                    Additions include total contributed tangible capital assets of $285,368 (2018 – $337,908) consisting
                    of $285,322 from AI (2018 – $337,837), of which $nil (2018 - $6,286) was related to the transferred
                    land and $285,322 (2018- $331,551) was related to other tangible capital assets. AHS also received
                    $46 from other sources (2018 – $71).

               (b) Leased Equipment

                    Equipment includes tangible capital assets acquired through capital leases at a cost of $17,240
                    (2018 – $13,352) with accumulated amortization of $12,119 (March 31, 2018 – $11,637). For the
                    year ended March 31, 2019, leased equipment included a net increase of $4,363 related to vehicles
                    under capital leases (2018 – net increase of $494).




90                                                                                              Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                            Financial Information



Note 18     Tangible Capital Assets (continued)

               (c) Leased Land

                     Land at the following sites has been leased to AHS at nominal values:

                                          Site                                Leased from                  Lease Expiry
                      Cross Cancer Institute Parkade                  University of Alberta            July 2019
                      Evansburg Community Health Centre               Yellowhead County                April 2031
                      Myrnam Land                                     Eagle Hill Foundation            May 2038
                      Two Hills Helipad                               Stella Stefiuk                   August 2041
                      McConnell Place North                           City of Edmonton                 September 2044
                      Northeast Community Health Centre               City of Edmonton                 February 2047
                      Foothills Medical Centre Parkade                University of Calgary            July 2054
                      Alberta Children’s Hospital                     University of Calgary            December 2103


Note 19     Accumulated Surplus

Accumulated surplus is comprised of the following:

                                                                    2019                                             2018
                                                                  Internally
                                  Invested in
                                                                 Restricted
                                   Tangible         Endowments                  Unrestricted
                                                        (b)      Surplus for                        Total            Total
                                    Capital                                      Surplus(d)
                                                                    Future
                                    Assets(a)
                                                                 Purposes(c)
Balance, beginning of year    $       817,160       $    74,694 $ 237,176       $    188,025    $   1,317,055    $    1,225,659

Annual operating (deficit)
  surplus                                       -             -             -        (38,631)         (38,631)            91,396

Tangible capital assets
  acquired with internal
  funds                               244,268                 -      (44,482)       (199,786)                -                 -
Amortization of internally
  funded tangible capital
  assets                             (146,223)                -             -        146,223                 -                 -

Principal payments on debt             22,133                 -             -        (22,133)                -                 -
Payments on obligations
  under capital leases                  2,349                 -             -         (2,349)                -                 -
Payment on life lease
  deposits                                596                 -             -           (596)                -                 -


 Transfer of internally
   restricted surplus                           -             -       24,532         (24,532)                -                 -
 Transfer of endowment
   contributions                                -           463             -          (463)                 -                 -

Balance, end of year          $      940,283 $           75,157 $ 217,226 $          45,758 $       1,278,424 $      1,317,055

               (a) Invested in Tangible Capital Assets

                     The accumulated surplus invested in tangible capital assets represents the net book value of
                     tangible capital assets that have previously been purchased with AHS’ unrestricted surplus. AHS
                     has no plans to monetize these assets to cover future operations




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                               91
Financial Information



Note 19    Accumulated Surplus (continued)

             (b) Endowments

                  Endowments represent the portion of accumulated surplus that is restricted and must be maintained
                  in perpetuity. Transfers of endowment contributions from unrestricted surplus include $463 (2018 -
                  $328) of contributions and reinvested income received in the year (Note 5) offset by other transfers
                  of $nil (2018 - $344).

             (c) Internally Restricted Surplus for Future Purposes

                  The Board has approved the restriction of accumulated surplus for future purposes as follows:
                                                                             2019                      2018
                      Ancillary services (i)                           $           112,508 $                124,525
                      Insurance equity requirements (ii)                            21,568                   34,835
                      Foundations (iii)                                             42,816                   41,395
                      Other (iv)                                                    40,334                   36,421
                      Internally restricted surplus for future
                        purposes                                       $           217,226 $                237,176
                  (i) Restriction of ancillary operation surpluses from parking, retail food services, and controlled
                         entities.
                  (ii) Restriction of surplus related to equity of the LPIP.
                  (iii) Restriction of surplus related to AHS’ Controlled Foundations.
                  (iv) Restriction of surplus to address funding of expenses for certain initiatives spanning multiple
                         fiscal years.

             (d) Unrestricted Surplus

                  Unrestricted surplus represents the portion of accumulated surplus that has not been internally
                  restricted for future purposes, invested in tangible capital assets, or endowments.


Note 20    Contractual Obligations and Contingent Liabilities

             (a) Leases

                  AHS is contractually committed to future operating lease payments as follows:
                             Year ended March 31                              Total Lease Payments
                                       2020                        $                    61,390
                                       2021                                             54,899
                                       2022                                             51,788
                                       2023                                             45,550
                                       2024                                             36,295
                                   Thereafter                                          103,790
                                                                   $                   353,712

             (b) Contingent Liabilities

                  AHS is subject to legal claims during its normal course of business. AHS records a liability when the
                  assessment of a claim indicates that a future event is likely to confirm that an asset had been
                  impaired or a liability incurred at the date of the financial statements and the amount of the
                  contingent loss can be reasonably estimated.

                  Accruals have been made in specific instances where it is likely that losses will be incurred based
                  on a reasonable estimate. As at March 31, 2019, accruals have been recorded as part of the
                  provision for unpaid claims and other liabilities (Note 12). Included in this accrual are claims in which
                  AHS has been jointly named with the Minister. The accrual provided for these claims under the
                  provision for unpaid claims represents AHS’ portion of the liability.




92                                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                    Financial Information



Note 20     Contractual Obligations and Contingent Liabilities (continued)

              AHS has been named in 225 legal claims (2018 – 223 claims) related to conditions in existence at March
              31, 2019 where the likelihood of the occurrence of a future event confirming a contingent loss is not
              reasonably determinable. Of these, 205 claims have $415,883 in specified amounts and 20 have no
              specified amounts (2018 – 208 claims with $308,012 of specified claims and 15 claims with no specified
              amounts). The resolution of indeterminable claims may result in a liability, if any, that is different than
              the claimed amount.

              AHS has been named as a co-defendant, along with the GOA, in a certified Class Action (the Claim)
              arising from increases to long-term accommodation charges implemented by Alberta Government
              regulations enacted on and after August 1, 2003, and paid by residents of long-term care facilities. The
              Claim was originally dismissed after trial, but is now currently under appeal. The likelihood of the Claim
              is considered by AHS to be indeterminable, and the amount of the Claim has not yet been specified.


Note 21   Related Parties

              Transactions with related parties are included within these consolidated financial statements, unless
              otherwise stated.

              The Minister of Health appoints all members of the AHS Board. The viability of AHS’ operations depends
              on transfers from AH. Transactions between AHS and AH are reported and disclosed in the
              Consolidated Statement of Operations, the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, and the Notes
              to the Consolidated Financial Statements, and are therefore excluded from the table below.

              Related parties also include key management personnel of AHS. AHS has defined key management
              personnel to include those disclosed in Sub-Schedule 2A & 2B of these consolidated financial
              statements. Related party transactions with key management personnel primarily consist of
              compensation related payments and are considered to be undertaken on similar terms and conditions
              to those adopted if the entities were dealing at arm’s length.

              AHS is considered to be a related party with those entities consolidated or included on a modified equity
              basis in the GOA consolidated financial statements. Transactions between AHS and the other ministries
              are recorded at their exchange amount as follows:

                                                              Revenues(a)                         Expenses
                                                         2019           2018                 2019          2018
            Ministry of Advanced Education (b)      $      57,266   $      55,936      $      184,812   $ 179,759
            Ministry of Infrastructure (c)                340,892         350,196                   1          276
            Other ministries (d)                           55,399          58,101              31,064       31,460
            Total for the year                      $     453,557   $     464,233      $      215,877   $ 211,495

                                                           Receivable from                       Payable to
                                                         2019           2018                 2019           2018
            Ministry of Advanced Education (b)      $       7,692  $       4,578       $       35,618   $    22,749
            Ministry of Infrastructure (c)                50,566          21,526               65,000             -
            Other ministries (d)                            8,483         16,891              349,886       378,440
            Balance, end of year                    $     66,741   $      42,995       $      450,504   $ 401,189

               (a) Revenues with GOA ministries include other government transfers of $420,622 (2018 – $429,855),
                   (Note 4), other income of $30,847 (2018 – $32,004), (Note 6), and fees and charges of $2,088
                   (2018 – $2,374).




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                       93
Financial Information



Note 21    Related Parties (continued)

                (b) Most of AHS transactions with the Ministry of Advanced Education relate to initiatives with the
                    University of Alberta and the University of Calgary. These initiatives include teaching, research,
                    and program delivery. A number of physicians are employed by either AHS or the universities but
                    perform services for both. Due to proximity of locations, some initiatives result in sharing physical
                    space and support services. The revenue and expense transactions are a result of funding
                    provided from one to the other and recoveries of shared costs.

                (c) The transactions with the Ministry of Infrastructure (AI) relate to the construction and funding of
                    tangible capital assets. These transactions include operating transfers of $58,957 (2018 –
                    $63,699) and recognition of expended deferred capital revenue of $281,935 (2018 – $286,497)
                    relating to tangible capital assets with stipulations or external restrictions to utilize over their
                    remaining useful lives. Not included in the table above but included in total amounts disclosed in
                    Note 18(a) is the transfer of land and other tangible capital assets from AI of $285,322 (2018 –
                    $337,837).

                (d) The payable transactions with other ministries include the debt payable to ACFA (Note 17(a)).

              At March 31, 2019, AHS has recorded deferred revenue from other ministries within the GOA, excluding
              AH, of $29,073 (March 31, 2018 – $25,865) related to unexpended deferred operating revenue (Note
              14), $6,173 (March 31, 2018 – $8,858) related to unexpended deferred capital revenue (Note 15) and
              $6,392,267 (March 31, 2018 – $6,270,713) related to expended deferred capital revenue (Note 16).

              Contingent liabilities in which AHS has been jointly named with other government entities within the
              GOA are disclosed in Note 20.


Note 22    Government Partnerships

              AHS has proportionately consolidated 50% of the results of the PCNs and NACTRC and 33.33% of the
              results in iRSM. The following is 100% of the financial position and results of operations for AHS’
              government partnerships.
                                                                            2019                       2018
                Financial assets                                   $               71,913    $                 74,306
                Liabilities                                                        71,913                      74,306
                Accumulated surplus                                $                    -    $                      -

                Total revenues                                     $             247,615     $                248,123
                Total expenses                                                   247,615                      248,123
                Annual surplus                                     $                   -     $                      -


Note 23    Trusts under Administration

              (a) Health Benefit Trust of Alberta (HBTA)

                  AHS is one of more than 30 participants in the HBTA and has a majority of representation on the HBTA
                  governance board. The HBTA is a formal health and welfare trust established under a Trust Agreement
                  effective January 1, 2000. The HBTA provides health and other related employee benefits pursuant to
                  the authorizing Trust Agreement.

                  HBTA’s balances as at December 31 are as follows:

                                                                            2018                       2017
                Financial assets                                   $            145,274      $                131,234
                Liabilities                                                      15,887                        15,340
                Net financial assets                               $            129,387      $                115,894

                Non-financial assets                                                   6                            6
                Net assets                                         $             129,393     $                115,900




94                                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                Financial Information



Note 23   Trusts under Administration (continued)

                 AHS has included in prepaid expenses $93,784 (March 31, 2018 – $91,077) representing in
                 substance a prepayment of future premiums to HBTA. For the fiscal year ended March 31, 2019,
                 AHS paid premiums of $391,734 (2018 – $382,090) to HBTA.

             (b) Other Trust Funds

                 AHS receives funds in trust for research and development, education, and other programs. These
                 amounts are held and administered on behalf of others in accordance with the terms and conditions
                 embodied in the relevant agreements with no unilateral power to appropriate the funds or to change
                 the conditions set out in the trust indenture (or agreement) and therefore are not reported in these
                 consolidated financial statements. As at March 31, 2019, the balance of funds held in trust by AHS
                 for research and development is $100 (March 31, 2018 – $150).

                 AHS receives funds in trust from continuing care residents for personal expenses. As at March 31,
                 2019, the balance of these funds is $1,452 (March 31, 2018 – $1,686). These amounts are not
                 included in the consolidated financial statements.

                 AHS and a third party trustee administer the SERP in accordance with a retirement compensation
                 arrangement trust agreement. As at March 31, 2019, there are $32,674 in plan assets (March 31,
                 2018 - $34,474). These amounts are not included in the consolidated financial statements.

Note 24   Segment Disclosure

              The Consolidated Schedule of Segment Disclosures – Schedule 3 is intended to enable users to better
              understand the reporting entity and identify the resources allocated to the major activities of the
              organization.

              AHS’ revenues, as reported on the Statement of Operations, are most informatively presented by source
              and are not reasonably assignable to the reportable segments. For each reported segment, the
              expenses are directly or reasonably attributable to the segment.

              The segments have been selected based on the presentation that is adopted for the financial reporting,
              planning and budget processes, and represent the major distinguishable activities of AHS.

              Segments include:

             (a) Community-based care

                 Community-based care includes supportive living, palliative and hospice care, and community
                 programs including Primary Care Networks, Family Care Clinics, urgent care centres, and community
                 mental health. This segment excludes community-based dialysis, oncology, and surgical services.

             (b) Home care

                 Home care is comprised of home nursing and support.

             (c) Continuing care

                 Continuing care is comprised of long-term care including chronic and psychiatric care in facilities
                 operated by AHS and contracted providers.

             (d) Population and public health

                 Population and public health is comprised primarily of health promotion, disease and injury
                 prevention, and health protection.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                  95
Financial Information



Note 24    Segment Disclosure (continued)

             (e) Ambulance services

                 Ambulance services is comprised of ground ambulance, air ambulance, patient transport, and
                 Emergency Medical Services (EMS) central dispatch. AHS also supports community paramedic
                 programs, as well as other programs that support the learning, development, quality and safety of
                 EMS professionals.

              (f) Acute care

                 Acute care is comprised predominantly of patient care units such as medical, surgical, intensive care,
                 obstetrics, pediatrics, mental health, emergency, day/night care, clinics, day surgery, and contracted
                 surgical services. This segment also includes operating and recovery rooms.

              (g) Diagnostic and therapeutic services

                 Diagnostic and therapeutic services support and provide care for patients through clinical lab (both
                 in the community and acute), diagnostic imaging, pharmacy, acute and therapeutic services such as
                 physiotherapy, occupational therapy, respiratory therapy, and speech language pathology.

             (h) Education and research

                 Education and research is comprised primarily of costs pertaining to formally organized health
                 research and graduate medical education, primarily funded by donations, and third party
                 contributions.

             (i) Support services

                 Support services is comprised of building maintenance operations (including utilities), materials
                 management (including purchasing, central warehousing, distribution and sterilization),
                 housekeeping, patient registration, health records, food services, and emergency preparedness.

             (j) Information technology

                 Information technology is comprised of costs pertaining to the provision of services to design,
                 develop, implement, and maintain effective and efficient management support systems in the areas
                 of data processing, systems engineering, technical support, and systems research and development.

             (k) Administration

                 Administration is comprised of human resources, finance, communications and general
                 administration, as well as a share of administration of certain contracted health service providers.
                 General administration includes senior executives and many functions such as planning and
                 development, infection control, quality assurance, patient safety, insurance, privacy, risk
                 management, internal audit, and legal. Activities and costs directly supporting clinical activities are
                 excluded.

Note 25    Corresponding Amounts

              Certain amounts have been reclassified to conform to 2019 presentation.


Note 26    Approval of Consolidated Financial Statements

              The consolidated financial statements were approved by the AHS Board on May 30, 2019.




96                                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                             Financial Information



Alberta Health Services


Schedule 1 – Consolidated Schedule of Expenses by Object
For the year ended March 31, 2019
(thousands of dollars)

                                                                     2019                         2018
                                                          Budget            Actual               Actual
                                                          (Note 3)

  Salaries and benefits (Schedule 2)                  $    8,239,000    $    8,321,637   $          8,081,785
  Contracts with health service providers                  2,762,000         2,749,686              2,621,371
  Contracts under the Health Care Protection Act              18,000            17,186                 18,337
  Drugs and gases                                            496,000           506,662                465,753
  Medical and surgical supplies                              427,000           431,125                400,795
  Other contracted services                                1,381,000         1,322,806              1,253,012
  Other(a)                                                 1,384,000         1,434,605              1,384,755
  Amortization and loss on disposals of tangible
   capital assets (Note 18)                                  533,000           529,628               538,639
                                                      $   15,240,000    $   15,313,335   $        14,764,447

  (a) Significant amounts included in Other are:
             Equipment expense                        $      198,000    $     212,312    $            217,147
             Other clinical supplies                         146,000          161,392                 153,879
             Utilities                                       109,000          118,372                 118,091
             Building and ground expenses                    120,000          118,206                 119,590
             Building rent                                   115,000          112,921                 112,318
             Insurance and liability claims                   54,000           90,867                  58,398
             Housekeeping, laundry and linen, plant
               maintenance and biomedical
               engineering supplies                           85,000            90,608                 86,825
             Food and dietary supplies                        74,000            80,827                 79,346
             Office supplies                                  43,000            63,279                 63,583
             Minor equipment purchases                        53,000            59,246                 49,204
             Fundraising and grants awarded                   56,000            51,336                 51,621
             Travel                                           50,000            45,423                 38,646
             Telecommunications                               39,000            38,917                 38,026
             Licenses, fees and memberships                   31,000            17,211                 19,216
             Education                                        18,000            12,428                 12,695
             Other                                           193,000           161,260                166,170
                                                      $    1,384,000    $    1,434,605   $          1,384,755




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                97
Financial Information




Alberta Health Services


Schedule 2 – Consolidated Schedule of Salaries and Benefits
For the year ended March 31, 2019
(thousands of dollars)

                                                                              2019                                                                            2018
                                                                                                          Severance (e)
                                                     Other
                                                                     Other Non-
                                       Base          Cash
                         FTE(a)                                        Cash              Subtotal     Number of                       Total         FTE (a)          Total
                                      Salary (b)    Benefits                                                            Amount
                                                         (c)         Benefits (d)                     Individuals


Total Board (Sub-
 Schedule 2A)               10.82 $                -$          334 $                -$         334                  - $          -$           334         9.25 $             311
Total Executive (Sub-
 Schedule 2B)               14.00          5,165                57            806             6,028                 -            -       6,028           14.12          6,085
Management
Reporting
 to CEO Direct
Reports                     56.86         12,876               285          2,636            15,797                 -            -      15,797           72.86         20,069
Other Management          3,031.59      363,150           4,333            81,856           449,339             30        3,377        452,716        2,964.39        438,982
Medical Doctors not
 included above(f)         141.84         44,184          1,235             3,519            48,938                 3      996          49,934          148.12         49,908
Regulated nurses not
 included above:
 RNs, Reg. Psych.
 Nurses, Grad Nurses     19,566.39     1,862,083        272,500          410,140          2,544,723                 4       86        2,544,809     19,137.97        2,479,561
 LPNs                     5,233.39      343,230          45,744            75,851          464,825                  2       58         464,883        4,987.54        440,381
Other health technical
 and professional        16,948.48     1,523,761         92,622          346,116          1,962,499             14         502        1,963,001     16,461.03        1,901,555
Unregulated health
 service providers        9,310.80      467,839          60,249          110,357            638,445                 2        7         638,452        8,908.36        613,100
Other staff              27,251.74     1,712,694         99,212          373,098          2,185,004             45        1,100       2,186,104     26,738.08        2,132,245


Sub-total                81,565.91     6,334,982        576,571        1,404,379          8,315,932           100         6,126       8,322,058     79,441.72        8,082,197
Less amounts
 included in Other
 contracted services                        (345)              (2)            (74)            (421)                 -            -        (421)                          (412)


Total                                $ 6,334,637 $ 576,569 $           1,404,305 $        8,315,511           100 $ 6,126 $           8,321,637                 $    8,081,785


This schedule does not include $27,393 in capitalized salaries and benefits (2018 - $10,303).

The accompanying footnotes and sub-schedules are part of this schedule




98                                                                                                                           Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                 Financial Information



Alberta Health Services
Sub-Schedule 2A – Board Remuneration


                                                                                           2019           2018
                                               Term                  2019 Committees    Remuneration   Remuneration

 Board Chair
 Linda Hughes(g)                      Since Nov 27, 2015       ARC, CEC, FC, GC, HRC,   $         69   $          67
                                                               QSC

 Board Members
 Dr. Brenda Hemmelgarn (Vice Chair)   Since Nov 27, 2015       CEC (Chair), HR, QSC               49              48
 David Carpenter                      Since Nov 27, 2015       ARC (Chair), CEC, FC
                                                               (Chair), HR                        35              35
 Heather Crowshoe (nee Hirsch)        Since Nov 3, 2016        CEC, GC, QSC                       30              31
 Richard Dicerni                      Since Nov 27, 2015       CEC, FC, HRC (Chair)               27              30
 Robb Foote                           Apr 12, 2018 to Feb 1,   CEC, FC, GC                        24               -
                                      2019
 Hugh Sommerville                     Since Nov 27, 2015       ARC, GC (Chair)                    31              33
 Marliss Taylor                       Since Nov 27, 2015       CEC, GC, HRC (Chair),              34              32
                                                               QSC
 Glenda Yeates                        Since Nov 27, 2015       ARC, FC, QSC (Chair)               31              33

 Board Committee Participants(h)
 Dr. Brian Postl                      Since Jan 1, 2018        QSC                                 2               -
 Gord Winkel                          Since Nov 27, 2015       QSC                                 2               2

 Total Board                                                                            $        334   $         311

Board members were remunerated with monthly honoraria. In addition, they received remuneration for attendance at
Board and committee meetings.

Board committees were established by the Board to assist in governing AHS and overseeing the management of AHS’
business and affairs. Board committee participants are eligible to receive remuneration for meetings attended, and in
addition Board committee chairs also receive a monthly honorarium.

Committee legend: ARC = Audit and Risk Committee, CEC = Community Engagement Committee, FC = Finance
Committee, GC = Governance Committee, HRC = Human Resources Committee, QSC = Quality and Safety Committee




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                   99
Financial Information




Alberta Health Services
Sub-Schedule 2B - Executive Salaries and Benefits

For the year ended March 31, 2019
(thousands of dollars)
                                                                                                        2019
                                                                                      Other      Other Non-
                                                                        Base                                                 Severance
              For the Current Fiscal Year                    FTE (a)                  Cash         Cash          Subtotal                   Total
                                                                       Salary (b)                                               (e)
                                                                                    Benefits (c) Benefits (d)
Board Direct Reports
Andrea Beckwith-Ferraton – Chief Ethics and
 Compliance Officer(n)                                         1.00 $         211 $           3$          34 $         248 $          - $       248
Ronda White – Chief Audit Executive(n)                         1.00           276             2           43           321            -         321
Dr. Verna Yiu – President and Chief Executive Officer(i,o)     1.00           572              -          84           656            -         656

CEO Direct Reports
Dr. Francois Belanger – VP, Quality and Chief Medical
 Officer(n)                                                    1.00           462              -          62           524            -         524
Dr. Ted Braun – VP and Medical Director, Central and
 Southern Alberta(n)                                           1.00           395              -          71           466            -         466
Mauro Chies – VP, CancerControl Alberta and Clinical
 Support Services(j,n)                                         0.52           171              -          28           199            -         199
Sean Chilton – VP, Health Professions and Practice(n)          1.00           329              -          55           384            -         384
Todd Gilchrist – VP, People, Legal and Privacy(k,n)            1.00           448             1           62           511            -         511
Deb Gordon – VP and Chief Health Operations Officer,
 Northern Alberta(n)                                           1.00           369              -          83           452            -         452
Karen Horon – Interim VP, Clinical Support Services(l)         0.48           110              -          19           129            -         129
Brenda Huband – VP and Chief Health Operations
  Officer, Central and Southern Alberta(n)                     1.00           369              -          62           431            -         431
Dr. Mark Joffe – VP and Medical Director, Northern
 Alberta(m,p)                                                  1.00           447            35           41           523            -         523
Deborah Rhodes – VP, Corporate Services and Chief
 Financial Officer(n)                                          1.00           388             1           54           443            -         443
Dr. Kathryn Todd – VP, System Innovations and
 Programs(m,p)                                                 1.00           289            15           43           347            -         347
Colleen Turner – VP, Community Engagement and
 Communications(n)                                             1.00           329              -          65           394            -         394



Total Executive                                               14.00 $       5,165 $          57 $        806 $       6,028 $          -$      6 ,028




100                                                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                                         Financial Information



Alberta Health Services
Sub-Schedule 2B - Executive Salaries and Benefits

For the year ended March 31, 2019 (continued)
(thousands of dollars)

                                                                                                    2018
                                                                                  Other      Other Non-
                                                                    Base                                                 Severance
              For the Prior Fiscal Year                  FTE (a)                  Cash         Cash          Subtotal                   Total
                                                                   Salary (b)                                               (e)
                                                                                Benefits (c) Benefits (d)
Board Direct Reports
Andrea Beckwith-Ferraton – Chief Ethics and
 Compliance Officer                                        0.79 $         166 $            -$         40 $         206 $          - $           206
Ronda White – Chief Audit Executive                        1.00           276              -          64           340            -             340
Dr. Verna Yiu – President and Chief Executive Officer      1.00           572              -         104           676            -             676

CEO Direct Reports
Dr. Francois Belanger – VP, Quality and Chief Medical
 Officer                                                   1.00           462              -          43           505            -             505
Dr. Ted Braun – VP and Medical Director, Central and
 Southern Alberta                                          1.00           395              -          47           442            -             442
Mauro Chies – VP, Clinical Support Services                1.00           304              -          52           356            -             356
Sean Chilton – VP, Collaborative Practice, Nursing and
 Health Professions                                        1.00           329              -          72           401            -             401
Todd Gilchrist – VP, People, Legal and Privacy             1.00           449              -          64           513            -             513
Deb Gordon – VP and Chief Health Operations Officer,
 Northern Alberta                                          1.00           369              -          27           396            -             396
Karen Horon – Acting VP, Clinical Support Services         0.19            44              -            8           52            -              52
Brenda Huband – VP and Chief Health Operations
  Officer, Central and Southern Alberta                    1.00           369              -          45           414            -             414
Noela Inions – Chief Ethics and Compliance Officer         0.06            13              -            3           16            -              16
Dr. Mark Joffe – VP and Medical Director, Northern
 Alberta                                                   1.00           449            35           44           528            -             528
Dr. David Mador – VP and Medical Director, Northern
 Alberta                                                   0.08            36              -            4           40            -              40
Deborah Rhodes – VP, Corporate Services and Chief
 Financial Officer                                         1.00           433              -          68           501            -             501
Dr. Kathryn Todd – VP, System Innovations and
 Programs                                                  1.00           286            15           39           340            -             340
Colleen Turner – VP, Community Engagement and
 Communications                                            1.00           329              -          30           359            -             359


Total Executive                                           14.12 $       5,281 $          50 $        754 $        6,085 $         -$       6,085




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                                                101
  Financial Information




  Alberta Health Services
  Sub-Schedule 2C - Executive Supplemental Pension Plan and Supplemental
  Executive Retirement Plan
  (thousands of dollars)
  Certain employees will receive retirement benefits that supplement the benefits limited under the registered plans for service. The Supplemental
  Pension Plan (SPP) is a defined contribution plan and the Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan (SERP) is a defined benefit plan. The SERP
  is disclosed in Note 2(h)(iii). The amounts in this table represent the total SPP and SERP benefits earned by the individual during the fiscal year.
  The current period benefit costs for SPP and the other costs for SERP included in other non-cash benefits disclosed in Sub-Schedule 2B are
  prorated for the period of time the individual was in their position directly reporting to the Board or directly reporting to the President and Chief
  Executive Officer. Only individuals holding a position directly reporting to the Board or President and Chief Executive Officer during the current
  fiscal year are disclosed.

                                                                  2019                     2018
                                                        SPP       SERP
                                                    Current                                             Account Balance(3) or                        Account Balance(3) or
                                                                                                                                     Change
                                                    Period Other                                          Accrued Benefit                              Accrued Benefit
                                                                              Total        Total                                    During the
                                                    Benefit Costs(2)                                        Obligation                                   Obligation
                                                                                                                                      Year(4)
                                                    Costs(1)                                              March 31, 2018                               March 31, 2019
  Andrea Beckwith-Ferraton - Chief Ethics and
   Compliance Officer                               $         6$         -$           6$           5$                       12 $             5$                         17
  Dr. Francois Belanger - VP, Quality and Chief
   Medical Officer                                        36             -       36                36                     219               20                         239
  Dr. Ted Braun - VP and Medical Director,
   Central and Southern Alberta
        SERP                                                  -          5            5       (10)                        215                5                         220
        SPP                                               28             -       28                28                     117               23                         140
  Mauro Chies - VP, CancerControl Alberta and
   Clinical Support Services                              18             -       18                17                       87              15                         102
  Sean Chilton – VP, Health Professions and
   Practice                                               20             -       20                20                     139               17                         156
  Todd Gilchrist - VP, People, Legal and Privacy          34             -       34                34                     104               28                         132
  Deb Gordon - VP and Chief Health Operations
   Officer, Northern Alberta
        SERP                                                  -      15          15           (31)                        666               17                         683
        SPP                                               25             -       25                24                     147               18                         165
  Karen Horon - Interim VP, Clinical Support
   Services                                                   6          -            6            4                        21               6                          27
  Brenda Huband - VP and Chief Health
    Operations Officer, Central and Southern
    Alberta
        SERP                                                  -          9            9       (18)                        389               11                         400
        SPP                                               25             -       25                24                    `155               19                         174
  Dr. Mark Joffe - VP and Medical Director,
   Northern Alberta(m)                                        -          -            -             -                           -                -                           -
  Deborah Rhodes - VP, Corporate Services and
   Chief Financial Officer                                27             -       27                32                     211               18                         229
  Dr. Kathryn Todd - VP, System Innovations and
   Programs(m)                                                -          -            -             -                           -                -                           -
  Colleen Turner - VP, Community Engagement
   and Communications                                     20             -       20                20                       94              14                         108
  Ronda White - Chief Audit Executive                     14             -       14                14                       80              10                          90
  Dr. Verna Yiu - President and Chief Executive
   Officer                                                49             -       49                49                       90              47                         137
(1)   The SPP current period benefit costs are AHS contributions earned in the period.
(2)   Other SERP costs include retirement benefits, interest expense on the obligations, and amortization of actuarial gains and
      losses, offset by the expected return on the plans’ assets. AHS uses the straight line method to amortize actuarial gains and
      losses over the expected average remaining service life of the plan members.
(3)   The account balance represents the total cumulative earned contributions to the SPP as well as cumulative investment gains or
      losses on the contributions.
(4)   Changes in the accrued benefit obligation include current period benefit cost, interest accruing on the obligations and the
      amortization of any actuarial gains or losses in the period. Changes in the account balance include the current benefit costs and
      investment gains or losses related to the account.



  102                                                                                                                     Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                                     Financial Information



Alberta Health Services
Footnotes to the Consolidated Schedule of Salaries and Benefits

For the year ended March 31, 2019

        Definitions

          a.   For this schedule, full time equivalents (FTE) are determined by actual hours earned divided by 2,022.75 annual base hours.
               FTE for the Board and Board committee members are prorated using the number of days in the fiscal year between either
               the date of appointment and the end of the year, the date of appointment and the termination date, or the beginning of the
               year and the termination date.

          b.   Base salary is regular salary and includes all payments earned related to actual hours earned other than those reported as
               other cash benefits.

               Vacation accruals are included in base salary except for direct reports of the Board or President and Chief Executive Officer
               whose vacation accruals are included in other non-cash benefits.

          c.   Other cash benefits include, as applicable, honoraria, overtime, acting pay, membership fees, travel and automobile
               allowances, lump sum payments and an allowance for professional development. Relocation expenses are excluded from
               compensation disclosure as they are considered to be recruiting costs to AHS and not part of compensation unless related to
               severance. Expense reimbursements are also excluded from compensation disclosure except where the expenses meet the
               definition of the other cash benefits listed above.

          d.   Other non-cash benefits include:
               •      Employer’s current period benefit costs and other costs of supplemental pension plan and supplemental executive
                      retirement plans as defined in Sub-Schedule 2C
               •      Employer’s share of employee benefit contributions and payments made on behalf of employees including pension,
                      health care, dental and vision coverage, out-of-country medical benefits, group life insurance, accidental disability and
                      dismemberment insurance, and long and short-term disability plans
               •      Vacation accruals for direct reports of the Board or President and Chief Executive Officer, and
               •      Employer’s share of the cost of additional benefits including sabbaticals or other special leave with pay.

          e.   Severance includes direct or indirect payments to individuals upon termination which are not included in other cash benefits
               or other non-cash benefits.

          f.   Compensation provided by AHS for medical doctors included in salaries and benefits expense includes medical doctors paid
               through AHS payroll. The compensation provided by AHS for the remaining medical doctors is included in other contracted
               services.

        Board and Board Committee Participants

          g.   The Board Chair is an Ex-Officio member on all committees.

          h.   These individuals were participants of Board committees, but are not Board members or AHS employees.

        Executive

          i.   The incumbent is engaged in an employment agreement with AHS while on leave of absence from the University of Alberta.
               The contract term ends June 2, 2021.

          j.   The incumbent held the position of Vice President, Clinical Support Services until April 2, 2018 at which time the incumbent
               was seconded to Calgary Laboratory Services/Alberta Public Laboratories (CLS/APL) to serve as Interim Chief Executive
               Officer and was no longer a direct report to the President and Chief Executive Officer at AHS. During this tenure, CLS/APL
               reimbursed AHS for the incumbent’s base salary and benefits. The incumbent held the position of Interim Chief Executive
               Officer at CLS/APL until September 24, 2018 at which time the incumbent resumed the role of Vice President, Clinical Support
               Services at AHS and returned to being a direct report to the President and Chief Executive Officer at AHS. As a result of
               additional responsibilities effective November 1, 2018, the incumbent’s position was retitled Vice President, CancerControl
               Alberta and Clinical Support Services.

          k.   The incumbent received a vacation payout of $9 during the year for unused accrued vacation earned in prior periods; accrued
               vacation has been recorded in their compensation as a non-cash benefit in the period it was earned.

          l.   The incumbent held the position of Senior Operating Officer, Pharmacy Services until April 2, 2018 at which time the
               incumbent was appointed to Interim Vice President, Clinical Support Services and became a direct report to the President
               and Chief Executive Officer. The incumbent received an increase in base salary for the Interim Vice President, Clinical Support
               Services position. The incumbent held the position of Interim Vice President, Clinical Support Services until September 24,
               2018 at which time the incumbent resumed the role of Senior Operating Officer, Pharmacy Services and is no longer a direct
               report to the President and Chief Executive Officer.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                                          103
Financial Information




Alberta Health Services
Footnotes to the Consolidated Schedule of Salaries And Benefits

For the year ended March 31, 2019 (continued)
          m. The incumbent is on secondment from the University of Alberta. The incumbent’s total remuneration is comprised of salary
             amounts from both AHS and the University of Alberta, and AHS reimburses the University for the incumbent’s base salary
             and benefits. In lieu of enrollment into the AHS SPP, the incumbent will receive an annual lump sum supplemental payment
             equivalent to the amount the incumbent would have received as a member of the SPP and payable from AHS. The lump sum
             has been included in Other Cash Benefits.

         Termination Obligations

          n.   The incumbent’s termination benefits have not been predetermined.

          o.   In the case of termination without just cause by AHS, the incumbent shall receive severance pay equal to one month base
               salary for each completed month of service during the first year of the term or, after completion of one year of service of the
               term, 12 months base salary.

          p.   There is no severance associated with the secondment agreement. Upon termination of the secondment agreement, the
               incumbent would return to the incumbent’s regular position at the University of Alberta.




104                                                                                                   Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                              Financial Information



Alberta Health Services


Schedule 3 – Consolidated Schedule of Segment Disclosures
For the year ended March 31, 2019
(thousands of dollars)

                                                                         2019
                                             Contracts                                                    Amortization
                                Contracts                            Medical
                                             under the                             Other                  and loss on
                   Salaries and with health             Drugs and      and
                                            Health Care                          contracted     Other     disposals of    Total
                     benefits    service                  gases      surgical
                                            Protection                            services                  tangible
                                providers                            supplies
                                                Act                                                          capital
                                                                                                             assets

Community-
 based care        $    676,683 $   657,092 $        -$      3,562 $     3,668 $     31,951 $    66,106 $         372 $   1,439,434
Home care               327,974     246,052          -        179        7,651       83,441      22,850           148      688,295

Continuing care         316,452     775,491          -       7,600       4,030         5,278     25,340         2,152     1,136,343
Population and
 public health          299,568       9,860          -       6,840       4,089       14,836      12,218           315      347,726
Ambulance
 services               299,635     174,932          -       1,953       2,538         1,572     30,246        17,169      528,045
Acute care             2,990,169    394,435     17,186     461,210     344,354      600,224     172,436        64,810     5,044,824
Diagnostic and
 therapeutic
 services              1,563,024    293,708          -      22,738      60,534      291,808     228,911        44,688     2,505,411
Education and
 research               186,064       2,911          -         15           78       98,743      28,309           165      316,285


Support services       1,069,471    154,714          -       2,560       3,931      112,198     593,575       323,023     2,259,472
Information
  technology            241,201        514           -           -          16       37,156     152,125        76,593      507,605

Administration          351,396      39,977          -           5        236        45,599     102,489           193      539,895


Total              $ 8,321,637 $ 2,749,686 $    17,186 $   506,662 $   431,125 $   1,322,806 $ 1,434,605 $    529,628 $   15,313,335




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                                  105
Financial Information




Alberta Health Services

Schedule 3 – Consolidated Schedule of Segment Disclosures
(Continued)
For the year ended March 31, 2019
(thousands of dollars)

                                                                         2018
                                              Contracts                                                         Amortization
                              Contracts with under the             Medical and        Other                     and loss on
                 Salaries and                            Drugs and
                              health service Health Care            surgical        contracted      Other       disposals of    Total
                   benefits                                gases
                                providers    Protection             supplies         services                     tangible
                                                 Act                                                               capital
                                                                                                                   assets

Community-
 based care $         627,454 $     621,358 $          -$     3,145 $     3,487 $        34,256 $      79,651 $         495 $ 1,369,846

Home care             286,788       220,857            -       200        6,271          72,220        22,930           313      609,579
Continuing
 care                 311,317       717,001            -      7,417       3,967           4,271        27,115         1,712     1,072,800
Population
 and
 public
 health               296,632          9,584           -      7,342       2,620          13,702        13,967           436      344,283
Ambulance
 services             284,172       167,566            -      2,191       2,480           1,376        32,105        13,384      503,274
Acute care           2,958,575      392,382       18,337    429,181     321,496         600,951       152,921        55,011     4,928,854
Diagnostic
 and
 therapeutic
 services            1,514,809      300,341            -     13,360      57,078         264,219       222,739        40,510     2,413,056
Education
 and
 research             181,971          3,135           -        10          90           84,733        28,891           349      299,179
Support
 services            1,044,967      151,616            -      2,365       3,017         104,698       594,678       321,212     2,222,553
Information
  technology          226,839            584           -          -             -        37,570       141,772       104,070      510,835

Administration        348,261         36,947           -       542         289           35,016        67,986         1,147      490,188


TOTAL            $    8,081,785 $   2,621,371 $   18,337 $ 465,753 $    400,795 $     1,253,012 $    1,384,755 $    538,639 $   14,764,447




106                                                                                                 Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                                             Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta



Financial Statements
Table of Contents

Management’s Responsibility for the Financial Statements ..............................................................                        108

Independent Auditor’s Report ............................................................................................................      109

Statement of Operations ....................................................................................................................   112

Statement of Financial Position..........................................................................................................      113

Statement of Change in Net Financial Assets ...................................................................................                114

Statement of Cash Flows ...................................................................................................................    115

Notes to the Financial Statements .....................................................................................................        116

Schedule 1 – Expenses – Detailed by Object ....................................................................................                125

Schedule 2 – Salary and Benefits Disclosure ....................................................................................               126

Schedule 3 – Related Party Transactions..........................................................................................              127




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                                               107
Financial Information




Management’s Responsibility for the Financial Statements
March 31, 2019

The accompanying financial statements are the responsibility of management and have been reviewed
and approved by Senior Management. The financial statements were prepared in accordance with
Canadian Public Sector Accounting Standards, and of necessity, include some amounts that are based
on estimates and judgement.

To discharge its responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of financial reporting, management
maintains a system of internal accounting controls comprising written policies, standards and procedures,
a formal authorization structure, and satisfactory processes for reviewing internal controls. This system
provides management with reasonable assurance that transactions are in accordance with governing
legislation and are properly authorized, reliable financial records are maintained, and assets are
adequately safeguarded.

The Health Quality Council of Alberta’s Board of Directors carries out their responsibility for the financial
statements through the Audit and Finance Committee. The Committee meets with management and the
Auditor General of Alberta to review financial matters, and recommends the financial statements to the
Health Quality Council of Alberta Board of Directors for approval upon finalization of the audit. The
Auditor General of Alberta has open and complete access to the Audit and Finance Committee.

The Auditor General of Alberta provides an independent audit of the financial statements. His
examination is conducted in accordance with Canadian Generally Accepted Auditing Standards and
includes tests and procedures, which allow him to report on the fairness of the financial statements
prepared by management.

On behalf of the Health Quality Council of Alberta.




[Original signed by Andrew Neuner]                                  [Original signed by Jessica Wing]


Chief Executive Officer                                             Director, Financial Services
Andrew Neuner                                                       Jessica Wing
May 22, 2019                                                        May 22, 2019




108                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                   Financial Information




Independent Auditor’s Report
To the Board of Directors of the Health Quality Council of Alberta


Report on the Financial Statements

Opinion
I have audited the financial statements of the Health Quality Council of Alberta, which comprise
the statement of financial position as at March 31, 2019, and the statements of operations,
change in net financial assets, and cash flows for the year then ended, and notes to the
financial statements, including a summary of significant accounting policies.

In my opinion, the accompanying financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of the Health Quality Council of Alberta as at March 31, 2019, and the results
of its operations, its changes in net financial assets, and its cash flows for the year then ended
in accordance with Canadian public sector accounting standards.

Basis for opinion
I conducted my audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards. My
responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor's Responsibilities for
the Audit of the Financial Statements section of my report. I am independent of the Health
Quality Council of Alberta in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to my
audit of the financial statements in Canada, and I have fulfilled my other ethical responsibilities in
accordance with these requirements. I believe that the audit evidence I have obtained is
sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion.

Other information
Management is responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the
information included in the Annual Report, but does not include the financial statements and my
auditor’s report thereon. The Annual Report is expected to be made available to me after the
date of this auditor’s report.

My opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and I do not
express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.

In connection with my audit of the financial statements, my responsibility is to read the other
information identified above and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is
materially inconsistent with the financial statements or my knowledge obtained in the audit, or
otherwise appears to be materially misstated.

If, based on the work I will perform on this other information, I conclude that there is a material
misstatement of this other information, I am required to communicate the matter to those
charged with governance.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                    109
Financial Information




Responsibilities of management and those charged with governance for the financial
statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements
in accordance with Canadian public sector accounting standards, and for such internal control
as management determines is necessary to enable the preparation of the financial statements
that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.

In preparing the financial statements, management is responsible for assessing the Health
Quality Council of Alberta’s ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable,
matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless an
intention exists to liquidate or to cease operations, or there is no realistic alternative but to do
so.

Those charged with governance are responsible for overseeing the Health Quality Council of
Alberta’s financial reporting process.

Auditor's responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements
My objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a
whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an
auditor's report that includes my opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance,
but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with Canadian generally accepted
auditing standards will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can
arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they
could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis
of these financial statements.

As part of an audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards, I
exercise professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit. I
also:
• Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether
    due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and
    obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion. The
    risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one
    resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions,
    misrepresentations, or the override of internal control.
• Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit
    procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing
    an opinion on the effectiveness of the Health Quality Council of Alberta’s internal control.
• Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of
    accounting estimates and related disclosures made by management.
• Conclude on the appropriateness of management’s use of the going concern basis of
    accounting and, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists
    related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Health Quality Council
    of Alberta’s ability to continue as a going concern. If I conclude that a material uncertainty
    exists, I am required to draw attention in my auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the
    financial statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify my opinion. My
    conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of my auditor’s report.
    However, future events or conditions may cause the Health Quality Council of Alberta to
    cease to continue as a going concern.




110                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                  Financial Information



•   Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements,
    including the disclosures, and whether the financial statements represent the underlying
    transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation.

I communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the
planned scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant
deficiencies in internal control that I identify during my audit.


[Original signed by W. Doug Wylie, FCPA, FCMA, ICD.D]
Auditor General

May 22, 2019
Edmonton, Alberta




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                   111
Financial Information




Health Quality Council of Alberta


Statement of Operations
Year ended March 31, 2019
(thousands of dollars)
                                                                   2019                      2018

                                                        Budget            Actual            Actual
                                                        (Note 4)
Revenues

   Government transfers
      Alberta Health - operating grant              $     7,156       $    7,222       $       7,145

   Investment income                                          6                22                   10

   Other revenue                                            35                 70                   50

                                                          7,197            7,314               7,205



Expenses

   Administration                                         1,946            1,893               1,841

   Health system analytics                                2,669            2,319               2,065

   Health system improvement                              1,141            1,449               1,021

   Collaborative learning and education                    605               405                 624

   Communication                                           721               688                 634

   Ministerial assessment/study                            588               719                 452

                                                          7,670            7,473               6,637



Annual operating (deficit) surplus                        (473)             (159)                568

Accumulated operating surplus, beginning of year          1,384            1,926               1,358

Accumulated operating surplus, end of year          $      911        $    1,767       $       1,926




The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




112                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                    Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta


Statement of Financial Position
As at March 31, 2019
(thousands of dollars)
                                                                          2019             2018
Financial Assets
  Cash                                                               $   1,462        $          1,568
  Accounts receivable                                                          60                   49
                                                                         1,522                   1,617
Liabilities
  Accounts payable and accrued liabilities                                 757                     627
  Employee future benefits (Note 6)                                        121                      94
  Deferred revenue (Note 7)                                                     -                     6
  Deferred lease inducements (Note 8)                                      147                      98
                                                                         1,025                     825


Net Financial Assets                                                       497                     792


Non-Financial Assets
  Tangible capital assets (Note 9)                                       1,188                   1,067
  Prepaid expenses                                                             82                   67
                                                                         1,270                   1,134


Net Assets                                                               1,767                   1,926


Net Assets
Accumulated operating surplus (Note 11)                              $   1,767        $          1,926




Contractual obligations (Note 10)


The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                     113
Financial Information




Health Quality Council of Alberta


Statement of Change in Net Financial Assets
Year ended March 31, 2019
(thousands of dollars)

                                                                   2019                      2018
                                                         Budget           Actual             Actual
Annual operating (deficit) surplus                   $     (473)      $    (159)         $      568


Acquisition of tangible capital assets (Note 9)             (56)           (374)              (193)
Amortization and write down of tangible capital
assets (Note 9)                                             218             253                 207


(Increase) Decrease in prepaid expenses                        -            (15)                   6
(Decrease) Increase in net financial assets in
the year                                                                   (295)                588
Net financial assets, beginning of year                                     792                 204
Net financial assets, end of year                                     $     497          $      792




The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




114                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                      Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta


Statement of Cash Flows
Year ended March 31, 2019
(thousands of dollars)
                                                                             2019              2018
Operating Transactions
   Annual operating (deficit) surplus                                    $   (159)         $       568
   Non-cash items:
       Amortization and write down of tangible capital assets (Note 9)         253                 207
       Amortization of deferred lease inducements (Note 8)                     (37)                (41)
       Increase in employee future benefits (Note 6)                            27                    26
                                                                                84                 760
       (Increase) in accounts receivable                                       (11)                 (5)
       (Increase) Decrease in prepaid expenses                                 (15)                    6
       Increase (Decrease) in accounts payable and accrued liabilities         130               (100)
       (Decrease) Increase in deferred revenue                                  (6)                    6
       Increase in deferred lease inducements (Note 8)                          86                    86
   Cash provided by operating transactions                                     268                 753


Capital Transactions
   Acquisition of tangible capital assets (Note 9)                           (374)               (193)
   Cash (applied to) capital transactions                                    (374)               (193)


(Decrease) Increase in cash                                                  (106)                 560


Cash at beginning of year                                                    1,568               1,008
Cash at end of year                                                      $   1,462         $     1,568




The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                       115
Financial Information




Health Quality Council of Alberta


Notes to the Financial Statements
Year ended March 31, 2019
(thousands of dollars)
Note 1            AUTHORITY
                  The Health Quality Council of Alberta (HQCA) is a government not-for-profit organization formed
                  under the Health Quality Council of Alberta Act.

                  Pursuant to the Act, the HQCA has a mandate to promote and improve patient safety and health
                  service quality on a province-wide basis.

                  The HQCA is exempt from income taxes under the Income Tax Act.

Note 2            SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND REPORTING
                  PRACTICES
                  These financial statements are prepared in accordance with Canadian public sector accounting
                  standards (PSAS).

                  (a)    Reporting Entity
                  The financial statements reflect the assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses of the HQCA.

                  (b)    Basis of Financial Reporting
                  Revenues
                  All revenues are reported on the accrual basis of accounting. Cash received for which services
                  have not been provided by year end is recognized as deferred revenue.

                  Government transfers
                  Transfers from all governments are referred to as government transfers.

                  Government transfers and the associated externally restricted investment income are recognized
                  as deferred revenue if the eligibility criteria for use of the transfer, or the stipulations together with
                  the HQCA’s actions and communications as to the use of the transfer, create a liability. These
                  transfers are recognized as revenue as the stipulations are met and, when applicable, the HQCA
                  complies with its communicated use of these transfers.

                  All other government transfers, without stipulations for the use of the transfer, are recognized as
                  revenue when the transfer is authorized and the HQCA meets the eligibility criteria (if any).

                  Expenses
                  Expenses are reported on an accrual basis. The cost of all goods consumed and services received
                  during the year are expensed.

                  Grants and transfers are recognized as expenses when the transfer is authorized and eligibility
                  criteria have been met by the recipient.




116                                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                    Financial Information



Note 2           SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND REPORTING
                 PRACTICES (CONT’D)
                 (b)    Basis of Financial Reporting (Cont’d)


                 Valuation of Financial Assets and Liabilities
                 The HQCA’s financial assets and liabilities are generally measured as follows:

                    Financial Statement Component                   Measurement

                    Cash                                            Cost

                    Accounts receivable                             Lower of cost or net recoverable value

                    Accounts payable and accrued liabilities        Cost

                 The HQCA does not hold equities traded in an active market, nor engage in derivative contracts or
                 foreign currency transactions. The HQCA is not exposed to remeasurement gains or losses and,
                 consequently, a statement of remeasurement gains and losses is not presented.

                 Financial Assets
                 Financial assets are assets that could be used to discharge existing liabilities or finance future
                 operations and are not for consumption in the normal course of operations.

                 Financial assets are the HQCA’s financial claims on external organizations and individuals at the
                 year end.

                 Cash
                 Cash comprises cash on hand and demand deposits.

                 Accounts Receivable
                 Accounts receivable are recognized at the lower of cost or net recoverable value. A valuation
                 allowance is recognized when recovery is uncertain.

                 Liabilities
                 Liabilities represent present obligations of the HQCA to external organizations and individuals
                 arising from past transactions or events occurring before the year end, the settlement of which is
                 expected to result in the future sacrifice of economic benefits. They are recognized when there is
                 an appropriate basis of measurement and management can reasonably estimate the amounts.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                      117
Financial Information




Note 2            SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND REPORTING
                  PRACTICES (CONT’D)
                  (b)       Basis of Financial Reporting (Cont’d)


                  Deferred Lease Inducements
                  Deferred lease inducements represent amounts received for leasehold improvements and the value
                  of a rent-free period. Lease inducements are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis over
                  the term of the related lease and the amortization is recognized as a reduction of rent expense for
                  the year.

                  Employee Future Benefits
                  The HQCA Board has approved a defined contribution Supplementary Executive Retirement Plan
                  (SERP) for certain members of its executive staff. The SERP supplements the benefit under the
                  HQCA registered plan that is limited by the Income Tax Act (Canada). The HQCA contributes a
                  certain percentage of an eligible employee’s pensionable earnings in excess of the limits of the
                  Income Tax Act (Canada). This plan provides participants with an account balance at retirement
                  based on the contributions made to the plan and investment income earned on the contributions
                  based on investment decisions made by the participants.

                  Non-Financial Assets
                  Non-financial assets are acquired, constructed, or developed assets that do not normally provide
                  resources to discharge existing liabilities, but instead:

                  (a) are normally employed to deliver government services;
                  (b) may be consumed in the normal course of operations; and
                  (c) are not for sale in the normal course of operations.

                  Non-financial assets are limited to tangible capital assets and prepaid expenses.

                  Tangible Capital Assets
                  Tangible capital assets are recognized at cost less amortization, which includes amounts that are
                  directly related to the acquisition, design, construction, development, improvement or betterment of
                  the assets. Cost includes overhead directly attributable to construction and development, as well as
                  interest costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition or construction of the asset.

                  The cost, less residual value, of the tangible capital assets, excluding work-in-progress, is
                  amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives as follows:

                        Computer hardware and software              5 years

                        Office equipment                            10 years

                        Leasehold improvements                      Over term of lease

                  Tangible capital assets are written down when conditions indicate that they no longer contribute to
                  the HQCA’s ability to provide services, or when the value of future economic benefits associated
                  with the tangible capital assets are less than their book value. The net write-downs are accounted
                  for as expenses in the Statement of Operations.




118                                                                                     Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                    Financial Information



Note 2           SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND REPORTING
                 PRACTICES (CONT’D)
                 (b)    Basis of Financial Reporting (Cont’d)


                 Prepaid Expenses
                 Prepaid expenses are recognized at cost and amortized based on the terms of the agreement.

                 Funds and Reserves
                 Certain amounts, as approved by the Board of Directors, are set aside in accumulated operating
                 surplus for future operating and capital purposes. Transfers to/from funds and reserves are an
                 adjustment to the respective fund when approved.

                 Measurement Uncertainty
                 Measurement uncertainty exists when there is a variance between the recognized or disclosed
                 amount and another reasonably possible amount. The amounts recognized for amortization of
                 tangible capital assets are based on estimates of the useful life of the related assets. Actual results
                 could differ from estimates.

                 Change in Accounting Policy
                 The HQCA has prospectively adopted the following standard from April 1, 2018: PS 3430
                 Restructuring Transactions. The adoption of this standard did not affect the financial statements.

Note 3           FUTURE ACCOUNTING CHANGES
                 The Public Sector Accounting Board has approved the following accounting standards:

                 PS 3280 Asset Retirement Obligations (effective April 1, 2021)
                 Effective April 1, 2021, this standard provides guidance on how to account for and report liabilities
                 for retirement of tangible capital assets.

                 PS 3400 Revenue (effective April 1, 2022)
                 This standard provides guidance on how to account for and report on revenue, and specifically, it
                 addresses revenue arising from exchange transactions and unilateral transactions.

                 Management is currently assessing the impact of these standards on the financial statements.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                     119
Financial Information




Note 4            BUDGET
                  The HQCA’s 2018-2019 operating budget with a budgeted deficit of ($473) was approved by the
                  Board of Directors on October 26, 2017 and submitted to the Ministry of Health. Subsequently,
                  changes to three expense descriptions on the statement of operations were made. They are as
                  follow:


                            2019 Expense description                            2018 Expense description

                  Health system analytics                             Survey, measure and monitor initiatives

                  Health system improvement                           Patient safety initiatives

                  Collaborative learning and education                Quality initiatives


Note 5            FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
                  The HQCA has the following financial instruments: accounts receivable, accounts payable and
                  accrued liabilities.

                  The HQCA has exposure to the following risks from its use of financial instruments: interest rate
                  risk, liquidity risk, other price risk and credit risk.

                  (a) Interest rate risk
                  Interest rate risk is the risk that the rate of return and future cash flows on the HQCA’s short-term
                  investments will fluctuate because of changes in market interest rates. As the HQCA invests in
                  short term deposits of 90 days or less and accounts payable are non-interest bearing, the HQCA is
                  not exposed to significant interest rate risk relating to its financial instruments.

                  (b) Liquidity risk
                  Liquidity risk is the risk that the HQCA will encounter difficulty in meeting obligations associated
                  with financial liabilities. The HQCA enters into transactions to purchase goods and services on
                  credit. Liquidity risk is measured by reviewing the HQCA’s future net cash flows for the possibility of
                  negative net cash flow. The HQCA manages the liquidity risk resulting from its accounts payable
                  obligations by maintaining cash resources and investing in short-term deposits of 90 days or less.

                  (c) Other price risk
                  Other price risk is the risk that the fair value or future cash flows of a financial instrument will
                  fluctuate because of changes in market prices (other than those arising from interest rate risk or
                  foreign currency risk), whether those changes are caused by factors specific to the individual
                  financial instrument or its issuer, or factors affecting all similar financial instruments traded in the
                  market. Price risk is managed by holding short-term deposits for 90 days or less.

                  (d) Credit risk
                  The HQCA is exposed to credit risk from potential non-payment of accounts receivable. During the
                  fiscal year most of the HQCA’s receivables are from provincial agencies; therefore the credit risk is
                  minimized.




120                                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                    Financial Information



Note 6           EMPLOYEE FUTURE BENEFITS
                 The HQCA participates in the Local Authorities Pension Plan (LAPP), a multi-employer defined
                 benefit pension plan.

                 The HQCA accounts for this multi-employer pension plan on a defined contribution basis. The
                 HQCA is not responsible for future funding of the plan deficit other than through contribution
                 increases. Pension expense recorded in the financial statements is equivalent to HQCA’s annual
                 contributions of $405 for the year ended March 31, 2019 (2018 - $421).

                 At December 31, 2018, the Local Authorities Pension Plan reported a surplus of $3,469,347 (2017
                 – surplus of $4,835,515).

                 The Supplementary Executive Retirement Plan (SERP) payable at year ended March 31, 2019 is
                 $121 (2018 - $94). Interest contribution related to this plan is $27 (2018 - $26).

Note 7           DEFERRED REVENUE
                 Deferred revenue represents unspent externally restricted resources. Changes in the balance are
                 as follows:

                                                                                 2019            2018
                             Balance, beginning of the year                 $       6       $       -
                                   Amount received during the year                   -              6
                                   Less: Amount recognized as revenue              (6)              -
                             Balance, end of the year                       $        -      $       6


Note 8           DEFERRED LEASE INDUCEMENTS
                 The HQCA received a leasehold inducement of $137 for renovations in 2015. The inducement is
                 accounted for as a reduction of rent expense and amortized over the term of the lease.

                 The HQCA received an additional lease inducement in the form of free rent relating to a lease
                 renewal of the premises effective 2018. This amount will be amortized on a straight-line basis over
                 the term of the related lease and the amortization is recognized as a reduction of rent expense.


                                                                         2019            2018

                      Lease inducements - renovations                $     137       $    137

                      Lease inducements - rent free periods                209            123

                      Less accumulated amortization                      (199)           (162)

                                                                     $     147       $     98




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                     121
Financial Information




Note 9             TANGIBLE CAPITAL ASSETS

                                                            2019                                     2018
                                                Computer
                                    Office     Hardware &     Leasehold
                                  Equipment     Software    improvements            Total            Total


 Estimated useful life                10 yrs       5 yrs        5-10 yrs


 Historical Cost
 Beginning of year                $     401    $    466     $      1,013       $   1,880       $    1,771
 Additions                                 -        374                    -         374              193
 Disposals, including write-
 downs                                     -        (27)                   -         (27)             (84)
                                        401         813            1,013           2,227            1,880


 Accumulated Amortization
 Beginning of year                      185         229              399             813              690
 Amortization expense                    32          98              123             253              204
 Effect of disposals, including
 write-downs                               -        (27)                   -         (27)             (81)
                                        217         300              522           1,039              813


 Net book value at March 31,
 2019                             $     184    $    513     $        491       $   1,188




 Net book value at March 31,
 2018                             $     216    $    237     $        614                       $    1,067




122                                                                            Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                      Financial Information



Note 10           CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
                  Contractual obligations are obligations of the HQCA to others that will become liabilities in the
                  future when the terms of those contracts or agreements are met.

                  Estimated payment requirements for each of the next five years and thereafter are as follows:

                                             Year ended        Total lease
                                              March 31         payments

                                            2019 - 20         $      461
                                            2020 - 21                475
                                            2021 - 22                479
                                            2022 - 23                479
                                            Thereafter                  -
                                                              $    1,894

Note 11           ACCUMULATED OPERATING SURPLUS
                  Accumulated operating surplus is comprised of the following:

                                                                     2019                                         2018

                                    Investment in
                                      Tangible          Internally      Unrestricted
                                        Capital         Restricted        Surplus
                                       Assets(a)        Surplus(b)        (Deficit)           Total              Total




 Balance, April 1, 2018             $    1,065        $     861         $        -       $     1,926         $     1,358

 Annual operating (deficit)
 surplus                                      -                -             (159)             (159)                  568

 Net investments in capital
 assets                                    121                 -             (121)                    -                  -

 Transfers, prior year restricted                          (861)              861                     -

 Transfers, current year
 restricted                                   -             581              (581)                    -                  -

 Balance, March 31, 2019            $    1,186        $     581         $        -       $     1,767         $     1,926




 (a)    Net assets equal to net book value of internally funded tangible capital assets are restricted as these net
        assets are not available for any other purpose.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                         123
Financial Information




Note 11           ACCUMULATED OPERATING SURPLUS (CONT’D)

 (b)    The internally restricted surplus represents amounts set aside by the Board for future purposes. Those
        amounts are not available for other purposes without the approval of the Board. Internally restricted surplus
        based on the business plan is summarized as follows:

                                                                      2019             2018

                 Build capacity                                $          -      $        16

                 Measure to improve                                    240               670

                 Monitor the health system                               37               85

                 Engage with the public                                304                90

                                                               $       581       $       861


Note 12           COMPARATIVE FIGURES
                  Certain 2018 figures have been reclassified to conform to the 2019 presentation.

Note 13           APPROVAL OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
                  The financial statements were approved by the HQCA Board of Directors on May 22, 2019.




124                                                                                   Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                         Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta


Schedule 1 – Expenses – Detailed by Object
Year ended March 31, 2019
(thousands of dollars)

                                                                   2019                        2018

                                                       Budget                 Actual           Actual



Salaries and benefits                              $       4,635          $      4,207   $         4,146

Supplies, services and other                               2,817                 3,013             2,287

Amortization of tangible capital assets (Note 9)            218                    253                204

                                                   $       7,670          $      7,473   $         6,637




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                            125
Financial Information




Health Quality Council of Alberta


Schedule 2 – Salary and Benefits Disclosure
Year ended March 31, 2019
(thousands of dollars)
                                                                       2019                                   2018

                                                  Base                      Other Non-
                                                             Other Cash       Cash
                                                Salary (1)   Benefits (2)   Benefits (3)       Total          Total



 Board of Directors-Chair                   $            -   $       13       $       -    $       13     $      12

 Board of Directors-Members                              -           50               -            50            28

 Chief Executive Officer                              346            49              58           453           407

 Executive Director                                   184              -             35           219           220

                                            $         530    $      112       $      93    $      735     $     667




 (1) Base salary includes pensionable base pay.

 (2) Other cash benefits include honoraria for board members and vacation payouts. There were no bonuses paid
     in 2019.

 (3) Other non-cash benefits include: employer’s portion of all employee benefits and contributions or payments
     made on behalf of employees, including pension, Supplementary Executive Retirement Plan, health care,
     dental coverage, vision coverage, out of country medical benefits, group life insurance, accidental disability
     and dismemberment insurance, long and short-term disability plans, employee assistance program,
     employment insurance and fair market value parking.




126                                                                                   Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                 Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta


Schedule 3 – Related Party Transactions
Year ended March 31, 2019
(thousands of dollars)
Related parties are those entities consolidated or accounted for on a modified equity basis in the Government of
Alberta’s Consolidated Financial Statements. Related parties also include key management personnel and close
family members of those individuals in the HQCA. The HQCA and its employees paid or collected certain taxes and
fees set by regulation for premiums, licenses and other charges. These amounts were incurred in the normal course
of business, reflect charges applicable to all users, and have been excluded from this schedule.

The HQCA had the following transactions with related parties recorded in the Statement of Operations and the
Statement of Financial Position at the amount of consideration agreed upon between the related parties.

                                                                   2019               2018



                  Revenues

                       Grants                               $         7,222      $     7,146

                       Other                                               33                7

                                                            $         7,255      $     7,153

                  Expenses

                       Other services                       $             301    $       265



                  Receivable from related parties           $               -    $           1



                  Payable to related parties                $              19    $        47




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                  127
Financial Information




128                     Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                                      Other Financial Information




Other Financial Information

Table of Contents
        Department of Health ............................................................................................................       130
        Ministry of Health ..................................................................................................................   136




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                                                129
Other Financial Information



Department of Health

Statement of Credit or Recovery (unaudited)
Year ended March 31, 2019
(in thousands)


                                                                            2019

                                                        Actual                         Total Revenue
                                                       Revenue           Unearned       Received /         (Shortfall) /
                                      Authorized      Recognized         Revenue        Receivable           Excess


Support Programs
   Other Support Programs (a)        $      1,000    $        -      $         -       $          -       $      (1,000)

                                     $      1,000    $        -      $         -       $          -       $      (1,000)

(a) The Department receives funding from Health Canada to enhance existing health services to persons with chronic
    Hepatitis C virus infection.




130                                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                      Other Financial Information



Department of Health


Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited)
Year ended March 31, 2019
(in thousands)



                                                                                         Adjusted                     Unexpended
Program - Operating Expense                 Voted          Supplementary Adjustments      Voted          Voted           / (Over
                                          Estimate (1)       Estimate         (2)
                                                                                         Estimate       Actuals (3)     Expended)
                                              (Restated)
1   Ministry Support Services
1.1 Minister's Office                     $          745 $            - $          - $         745 $            724 $          21
1.2 Associate Minister's Office                      395              -            -           395               91           304
1.3 Deputy Minister's Office                       1,553              -            -          1,553           1,313           240
1.4 Strategic Corporate Support                   50,471              -            -        50,471          41,007          9,464
1.5 Policy Development
       and Strategic Support                      19,300              -            -        19,300          15,623          3,677
1.6 Health Advocates' Office                       1,893              -            -          1,893           1,289           604
                                                  74,357              -            -        74,357          60,047         14,310


2   Alberta Health Services
2.1 Continuing Care                            1,102,000              -            -      1,102,000      1,102,000                  -
2.2 Community Care                             1,200,000              -            -      1,200,000      1,200,000                  -
2.3 Home Care                                    687,000              -            -       687,000         687,000                  -
2.4 Acute Care                                 3,725,595              -            -      3,725,595      3,750,095         (24,500)
2.5 Ambulance Services                           456,000              -            -       456,000         461,000          (5,000)
2.6 Diagnostic and Therapeutic Services        2,363,000              -            -      2,363,000      2,363,000                  -
2.7 Population and Public Health                 317,000              -            -       317,000         317,000                  -
2.8 Health Workforce
       Education and Research                     79,000              -            -        79,000          79,000                  -
2.9 Information Technology                       444,000              -            -       444,000         444,000                  -
2.10 Support Services                          1,624,000              -            -      1,624,000      1,624,000                  -
2.11 Administration                              488,000              -            -       488,000         488,000                  -
                                              12,485,595              -            -     12,485,595     12,515,095         (29,500)

3   Physician Compensation and Development
3.1 Program Support                                9,687              -            -          9,687           6,994         2,693
3.2 Physician Remuneration                     4,374,198              -            -      4,374,198      4,358,325         15,873
3.3 Physician Development                        177,443              -            -       177,443         171,837          5,606
3.4 Physician Benefits                           358,671              -            -       358,671         397,050         (38,379)
                                               4,919,999              -            -      4,919,999      4,934,206         (14,207)




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                                131
Other Financial Information



Department of Health


Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited) (continued)
Year ended March 31, 2019
(in thousands)
                                                                                            Adjusted                  Unexpended
Program - Operating Expense                         Voted      Supplementary Adjustments     Voted       Voted          / (Over
                                                  Estimate (1)   Estimate         (2)
                                                                                            Estimate    Actuals (3)    Expended)
                                                  (Restated)
4     Drugs and Supplemental Health Benefits
4.1 Program Support                               $    44,027 $           - $         - $     44,027 $     45,473 $        (1,446)
4.2 Outpatient Cancer Therapy Drugs                   207,627             -           -      207,627      203,598           4,029
4.3 Outpatient Specialized High Cost Drugs            129,324             -           -      129,324      106,544         22,780
4.4 Seniors Drug Benefits                             574,600             -           -      574,600      564,348         10,252
4.5 Seniors Dental, Optical
        and Supplemental Health Benefits              130,226             -           -      130,226      132,687          (2,461)
4.6 Non-Group Drug Benefits                           271,193             -           -      271,193      230,076         41,117
4.7 Non-Group Supplemental Health Benefits               900              -           -          900           826                74
4.8 Assured Income for
        the Severely Handicapped Health Benefit       235,153             -           -      235,153      214,130         21,023
4.9 Child Health Benefit                               30,930             -           -       30,930       30,172            758
4.10 Adult Health Benefit                             225,033             -           -      225,033      216,991           8,042
4.11 Alberta Aids to Daily Living                     156,630             -           -      156,630      157,932          (1,302)
4.12 Pharmaceutical Innovation and Management         102,995             -           -      102,995      102,309            686
                                                  2,108,638               -           -     2,108,638   2,005,086        103,552
5     Addiction and Mental Health
5.1 Program Support                                     3,228             -           -         3,228        2,567           661
5.2 Addiction and Mental Health                        83,396             -           -       83,396       84,904          (1,508)
                                                       86,624             -           -       86,624       87,471            (847)
6     Primary Health Care
6.1 Program Support                                     3,745             -           -         3,745        2,821           924
6.2 Primary Health Care                               244,500             -           -      244,500      222,344         22,156
                                                      248,245             -           -      248,245      225,165         23,080
7   Population and Public Health
7.1 Program Support                                    16,540             -           -       16,540       11,401           5,139
7.2 Immunization Support                                3,721             -           -         3,721        2,181          1,540
7.3 Community-Based Health Services                    62,275             -           -       62,275       50,319         11,956
                                                       82,536             -           -       82,536       63,901         18,635


8     Allied Health Services                          112,416             -           -      112,416      115,504          (3,088)

9     Human Tissue and Blood Services                 192,232             -           -      192,232      190,254           1,978




132                                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                                                      Other Financial Information



Department of Health


Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited) (continued)
Year ended March 31, 2019
(in thousands)
                                                                                                       Adjusted                            Unexpended
Program - Operating Expense                           Voted            Supplementary Adjustments        Voted             Voted                 / (Over
                                                    Estimate (1)         Estimate         (2)
                                                                                                       Estimate          Actuals (3)           Expended)
                                                    (Restated)
10 Support Programs
10.1 Program Support                            $          9,448 $                  - $          - $        9,448 $            7,425 $              2,023
10.2 Health Quality Council of Alberta                     7,130                    -            -          7,130              7,222                  (92)
10.3 Protection for Persons in Care                        2,318                    -            -          2,318              1,875                  443
10.4 Monitoring, Investigations and Licensing              7,910                    -            -          7,910              6,464                1,446
10.5 Research and Support Programs                        22,244                    -            -         22,244             27,863               (5,619)
10.6 Health System Projects                                4,000                    -            -          4,000                790                3,210
                                                          53,050                    -            -         53,050             51,639                1,411
11 Out-of-Province Health Care Services
11.1 Program Support                                      7,999                     -            -         7,999               7,446                 553
11.2 Out-of-Province Health Care Services               163,878                     -            -       163,878             144,152              19,726
                                                        171,877                     -            -       171,877             151,598              20,279
12 Information Technology
12.1 Program Support                                       7,875                    -            -          7,875              6,372               1,503
12.2 Development and Operations                           75,970                    -            -         75,970             73,291               2,679
                                                          83,845                    -            -         83,845             79,663               4,182

13 Cancer Research
     and Prevention Investment                            25,000                    -            -         25,000             19,378               5,622

Program - Capital Grants
5 Addiction and Mental Health
5.2 Addiction and Mental Health                                    -                -            -                -            1,987               (1,987)
14 Infrastructure Support
14.1 Continuing Care Beds                                 48,990                    -            -         48,990             31,360               17,630
14.6 Other Health Initiatives                                  -                    -            -              -             13,000              (13,000)
                                                          48,990                    -            -         48,990             46,347                2,643

Credit or Recovery (Shortfall)                                     -                -       (1,000)        (1,000)                     -           (1,000)

Total                                           $ 20,693,404 $                  -       $   (1,000) $ 20,692,404 $ 20,545,354 $                  147,050
Lapse                                                                                                                                      $     147,050




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                                                      133
Other Financial Information



Department of Health


Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited) (continued)
Year ended March 31, 2019
(in thousands)
                                                                                                               Adjusted                         Unexpended
                                                                    Voted      Supplementary Adjustments        Voted          Voted              / (Over
                                                                  Estimate (1)   Estimate         (2)
                                                                                                               Estimate       Actuals (3)        Expended)
                                                                   (Restated)
Program - Capital Investment

Department Capital Acquisitions
7    Population and Public Health
7.2 Immunization Support                                         $              - $       -     $           - $           - $          94       $      (94)

12   Information Technology
12.2 Development and Operations                                        22,230             -             -          22,230          7,344            14,886

Capital Payments to Related Parties
5     Addiction and Mental Health
5.2 Addiction and Mental Health                                                 -         -             -                 -          110              (110)

14          Infrastructure Support
14.2 External Information Systems Development                           5,748             -             -           5,748                   -        5,748
14.3 Equipment for Cancer Corridor Projects                             3,469                           -           3,469                   -        3,469
14.4 Medical Equipment Replacement                                                                      -                                                -
       and Upgrade Program                                             30,000                           -          30,000         30,000                 -
14.5 Clinical Information System                                       80,000             -             -          80,000         73,249             6,751
14.6 Other Health Initiatives                                          50,000             -             -          50,000         37,785            12,215
Total                                                            $    191,447 $           -     $       -     $ 191,447 $ 148,582 $                 42,865
Lapse                                                                                                                                           $   42,865

Program - Financial

4           Drugs and Supplemental Health Benefits
4.3         Outpatient Specialized High Cost Drugs               $     10,700 $           -     $       -     $    10,700 $        6,311 $           4,389
7           Population and Public Health
7.2         Immunization Support                                       63,500             -             -          63,500         59,639             3,861

Total                                                            $     74,200 $           -     $       -     $    74,200 $       65,950 $           8,250
Lapse                                                                                                                                           $    8,250

      (1)   As per "Expense Vote by Program", "Capital Investment Vote by Program" and "Financial Transactions Vote by Program" page 156 to 158 of
            2018-2019 Government Estimates. Effective April 1, 2018, the responsibility for the administration of human resources services was
            transferred to the Department of Treasury Board and Finance (Order in Council 297/2018). As a result voted estimates in Strategic Corporate
            Support under Ministry Support Services has been restated by ($2,697).

      (2)   Adjustments include encumbrances, capital carry over amounts, transfers between votes and credit or recovery increases approved by
            Treasury Board Committee and credit or recovery shortfalls (Schedule 2). An encumbrance is incurred when, on a vote by vote basis, the
            total of actual disbursements in the prior year exceed the total adjusted estimate.
      (3)   Actuals exclude non-voted amounts such as amortization, inventory consumption, and valuation adjustments.




134                                                                                                               Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                                       Other Financial Information



Department of Health


Statement of Remissions, Compromises and Write-offs (unaudited)
Year ended March 31, 2019
(in thousands)

                                                                                   2019               2018
Write-Offs
              Medical Claim Recoveries                                         $     2,621        $      1,790
              Pharmaceuticals and Health Benefits                                       85                 238
              Other Receivables                                                        458                 432
Total Write-offs (1)                                                           $     3,164        $      2,460
(1)
      There were no remissions or compromises during the year.

The above statement has been prepared pursuant to Section 23 of the Financial Administration Act. The
statement includes all remissions, compromises and write-offs made or approved during the fiscal year.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                                 135
Other Financial Information



Ministry of Health

Payments Based on Agreements (unaudited)
Year ended March 31, 2019
(in thousands)

The Ministry entered into agreements, under the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan, with other
Provincial and Territorial Governments to provide health services on their behalf. The Ministry pays
service providers for services rendered under the agreements and recovers the amount paid from the
program sponsors. Service providers include Alberta Health Services and physicians. Costs based on
these agreements are incurred by the Ministry under authority in section 25 of the Financial
Administration Act.

Amounts paid based on agreements with program sponsors are as follows:


                                                                   2019                 2018
Other Provincial and Territorial Governments                  $      310,183      $       287,557


Accounts receivable includes $46,723 (2018 - $40,911).




Trust Funds under Administration (unaudited)
(in thousands)
Trust funds under administration are funds consisting of public money over which the Legislature has no
power of appropriation. Because the Ministry has no equity in the funds and administers them for the
purposes of various trusts, they are not included in the consolidated financial statements.

At December 31, 2018, the Health Benefit Trust of Alberta reported fund balance of $129,393 (2017 -
$115,900). At March 31, 2019, balance of trust funds held for others is $1,552 (2018 - $1,836).

The Ministry and a third party trustee administer the SERP in accordance with a retirement compensation
arrangement trust agreement. At March 31, 2019, there are $32,674 in plan assets (2018 - $34,474).




136                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2018–2019
                                                                 Annual Report Extracts and Other Statutory Reports




Annual Report Extracts and Other Statutory
Reports
Public Interest Disclosure (Whistleblower Protection) Act
Section 32 of the Public Interest Disclosure (Whistleblower Protection) Act states:

32(1) Every chief officer must prepare a report annually on all disclosures that have been made to the
designated officer of the department, public entity or office of the Legislature for which the chief officer is
responsible.

(2) The report under subsection (1) must include the following information: (a) the number of disclosures
received by the designated officer, the number of disclosures acted on and the number of disclosures not
acted on by the designated officer; (b) the number of investigations commenced by the designated officer
as a result of disclosures; (c) in the case of an investigation that results in a finding of wrongdoing, a
description of the wrongdoing and any recommendations made or corrective measures taken in relation
to the wrongdoing or the reasons why no corrective measure was taken.

(3) The report under subsection (1) must be included in the annual report of the department, public entity
or office of the Legislature if the annual report is made publicly available on request.

There were no disclosures of wrongdoing for the Department of Health between April 1, 2018 and
March 31, 2019.

Note: Alberta Health Services and the Health Quality Council of Alberta are considered separate entities
for the purposes of the Act, and therefore have individual reporting obligations.




Health | Annual Report 2018–2019                                                                               137
