Health, Government of Alberta | Health Annual Report 2024 –2025

©2025 Government of Alberta | Published: June 2025
ISBN 978-1-4601-6244-6
ISSN 2367-9824

This publication is issued under the Open Government Licence-Alberta
(http://open.alberta.ca/licence)



Note to Readers: Copies of the annual report are available on the Alberta Open Government Portal
website, at https://open.alberta.ca/publications/2367-9824




ii                                                                     Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
Table of Contents

Preface ........................................................................................................................................................ 2

Ministers’ Accountability Statement .............................................................................................. 3

Message from the Ministers .............................................................................................................. 4

Management’s Responsibility for Reporting .............................................................................. 6

Results Analysis ..................................................................................................................................... 8
      Ministry Overview ............................................................................................................................................ 9
      Discussion and Analysis of Results .................................................................................................... 18
      Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology ..................................................................... 54

Financial Information ......................................................................................................................... 61
      Reporting Entity and Method Consolidation ................................................................................... 63
      Ministry Financial Highlights ................................................................................................................... 64
      Supplemental Financial Information ................................................................................................... 70
      Financial Statements of Other Reporting Entities ........................................................................ 72
      Financial Information ................................................................................................................................ 154

Annual Report Extracts and Other Statutory Reports....................................................... 162




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                                                         1
Introduction




Preface

The Public Accounts of Alberta are prepared in accordance with the Financial Administration Act
and the Sustainable Fiscal Planning and Reporting Act. The Public Accounts consist of the annual
report of the Government of Alberta and the annual reports of each ministry.

On October 16, 2024, the government announced new ministry structures. As such, the
responsibilities for Continuing Care, previously held by the Ministry of Health were transferred to
the Ministry of Seniors, Community and Social Services. The 2024-25 Annual Report reflects the
2024-27 Ministry business plan, the Government of Alberta Strategic Plan, as well as the ministry’s
activities and accomplishments during the 2024-25 fiscal year, which ended on March 31, 2025.

The Annual Report of the Government of Alberta contains Budget 2024 Key Results, the audited
Consolidated Financial Statements and Performance Results, which is a comparison of actual
performance results to desired results set out in the government’s strategic plan.

This annual report of the Ministry of Health contains the Minister’s Accountability Statement, the
ministry’s Financial Information and Results Analysis, which is a comparison of actual performance
results to desired results set out in the Ministry Business Plan. This ministry annual report also
includes:

    •          the financial statements of entities making up the ministry including Alberta Health
               Services (AHS) and the Health Quality Council of Alberta (HQCA) for which the minister
               is responsible; and

    •          other financial information as required by the Financial Administration Act and
               Sustainable Fiscal Planning and Reporting Act, as separate reports, to the extent that the
               ministry has anything to report.

All Ministry annual reports should be considered along with the Government of Alberta Annual
Report to provide a complete overview of government’s commitment to openness, accountability,
and fiscal transparency.




2                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                         Introduction




Ministers’ Accountability Statement

The ministry’s annual report for the year ended March 31, 2025, was prepared under my direction
in accordance with the Sustainable Fiscal Planning and Reporting Act and the government’s
accounting policies. All the government’s policy decisions as at June 3, 2025, with material
economic or fiscal implications of which I am aware have been considered in the preparation of this
report.




[Originally signed by]
Honourable Adriana LaGrange
Minister of Primary and Preventative Health Services




[Originally signed by]
Honourable Matt Jones
Minister of Hospital and Surgical Health Services




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                   3
Introduction




Message from the Ministers

                                 Since our refocusing initiative was first introduced, we have made
                                 tremendous progress on implementing a reliable, accountable
                                 health care system that puts patients first while empowering health
                                 care workers.

                                 We know how important it is to get this work right. That’s why
                                 we’ve focused on engaging with the people who matter most:
                                 Albertans. During our first round of public engagement, we heard
                                 from almost 30,000 people through in-person and virtual town
                                 halls and using online tools. We launched a second round of
                                 engagement in January 2025 to share information and receive
                                 additional feedback, which has helped shape our path forward.

                                 Our 2024-25 annual report reflects the progress that has been
                                 made to date, including the introduction of four provincial health
                                 agencies that are responsible for overseeing key parts of the health
                                 care system: Primary Care Alberta, Acute Care Alberta, Assisted
                                 Living Alberta and Recovery Alberta. Each of these provincial
                                 health agencies reports to a minister, improving accountability and
                                 access to services across the province.

In addition to our refocusing work, the 2024-25 annual report highlights significant work that was
done over the past year to improve health outcomes for Albertans.

Specific to acute care, we added 83 emergency department physicians and 157 more emergency
department nurses in 2024-25, and we completed a record number of 318,601 surgeries,
surpassing the target of 310,000. We also opened the $1.4 billion Arthur J.E. Child Comprehensive
Cancer Centre, a state-of-the-art facility that offers 160 inpatient beds, chemotherapy chairs, exam
rooms, radiation vaults, outpatient services and clinical trial space to support Albertans living with
cancer.

To support improved access to primary care services, we introduced a new Primary Care Physician
Compensation Model that was developed in collaboration with the Alberta Medical Association.
This model encourages physicians to grow their patient panels while rewarding high-volume, high-
quality care with incentives. We also introduced a Nurse Practitioner Primary Care Program to
support nurse practitioners so they can practise comprehensive patient care autonomously and
operate their own practices, or practise autonomously in existing primary care settings, and we
launched the Rural and Remote Family Medicine Resident Physician Bursary Program to support
family medicine residents who commit to practising in rural or remote areas.

In total, Budget 2024 provided $26.2 billion in operating expenses to prioritize the delivery of high-
quality, reliable health services across the province. Budget 2024 also provided $4.5 billion over
three years to support capital projects like the redevelopment of the Red Deer Regional Hospital
Centre, plans for a stand-alone Stollery Children’s Hospital in Edmonton, and the replacement of the
Beaverlodge Health Centre.




4                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                          Introduction



The 2024-25 annual report sets the foundation for what lies ahead: a better, refocused health care
system that will ensure every Albertan, regardless of which part of the province they call home, can
access the services they need close to come.




[Originally signed by]
Honourable Adriana LaGrange
Minister of Primary and Preventative Health Services




[Originally signed by]
Honourable Matt Jones
Minister of Hospital and Surgical Health Services




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                    5
Introduction




Management’s Responsibility for Reporting

The Ministry of Health includes Alberta Health, AHS, Primary Care Alberta, and the Health Quality
Council of Alberta.

The executives of the individual entities within the ministry have the primary responsibility and
accountability for the respective entities. Collectively, the executives ensure the ministry complies
with all relevant legislation, regulations and policies.

Ministry business plans, annual reports, performance results and the supporting management
information are integral to the government’s fiscal and strategic plan, annual report, quarterly
reports and other financial and performance reporting.

Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the accompanying ministry financial
information and performance results for the ministry rests with the Minister of Health. Under the
direction of the minister, I oversee the preparation of the ministry’s annual report, which includes
the financial information, performance results on all objectives and initiatives identified in the
Ministry Business Plan, and performance results for all ministry-supported commitments that
were included in the 2024-27 Government of Alberta Strategic Plan. The financial information
and performance results, out of necessity, include amounts that are based on estimates and
judgments. The financial information is prepared using the government’s stated accounting
policies, which are based on Canadian public sector accounting standards. The performance
measures are prepared in accordance with the following criteria:

•   Reliable – information used in applying performance measure methodologies agrees with the
    underlying source data for the current and prior years’ results.
•   Understandable – the performance measure methodologies and results are presented clearly.
•   Comparable – the methodologies for performance measure preparation are applied consistently
    for the current and prior years’ results.
•   Complete – outcomes, performance measures and related targets match those included in the
    ministry’s Budget 2024.

As deputy minister, in addition to program responsibilities, I am responsible for the ministry’s
financial administration and reporting functions. The ministry maintains systems of financial
management and internal control which considers costs, benefits and risks that are designed
to:

•   provide reasonable assurance that transactions are properly authorized, executed in
    accordance with prescribed legislation and regulations, and properly recorded to maintain
    accountability of public money;
•   provide information to manage and report on performance;
•   safeguard the assets and properties of the province under ministry administration;
•   provide Executive Council, the President of Treasury Board and Minister of Finance, and the
    Minister of Health the information needed to fulfil their responsibilities; and
•   facilitate preparation of ministry business plans and annual reports required under the
    Sustainable Fiscal Planning and Reporting Act.




6                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                               Introduction



In fulfilling my responsibilities, I have relied, as necessary, on the executives of the individual
entities within the ministry.




[Originally signed by]
Rae-Ann Lajeunesse
Deputy Minister of Primary and Preventative Health Services
June 3, 2025




[Originally signed by]
Bryce Stewart
Deputy Minister of Hospital and Surgical Health Services
June 3, 2025




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                         7
Results Analysis




Results Analysis

Table of Contents
    Ministry Overview ............................................................................................................................................ 9
          Organizational Structure ...................................................................................................................... 9
          Operational Overview .......................................................................................................................... 11
          Key Highlights ......................................................................................................................................... 15
    Discussion and Analysis of Results......................................................................................................... 18
          Actions that support the priorities of the Government of Alberta Strategic Plan....... 18
          Outcome One: Enhanced timely access to an effective, safe and responsive publicly funded
          health care system that provides Albertans with the necessary care when and where they
          need it ......................................................................................................................................................... 20
          Outcome Two: A modernized and refocused health care system that delivers the highest-
          quality patient care to all Albertans, including Indigenous Peoples, regardless of where they
          reside in the province, and is fiscally sustainable .................................................................... 35
          Outcome Three: The health and well-being of all Albertans is protected, supported and
          improved, and health inequities among underserved populations, including Indigenous
          Peoples, are reduced ............................................................................................................................ 46
    Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology......................................................................... 54




8                                                                                                                                 Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis




Ministry Overview
Organizational Structure
The Government of Alberta is refocusing Alberta’s health care system to improve health outcomes
for Albertans and empower health care workers to deliver quality care across the province. A
refocused health care system will provide Albertans with the necessary care when and where they
need it, enhance government’s ability to provide system-wide oversight, set system priorities, and
ensure accountability for those priorities on behalf of Albertans. As part of this refocused approach,
the ministry continues to support Albertans’ health and well-being throughout their lives by
protecting public health and promoting wellness; coordinating and delivering safe, person-
centered, quality health care services; planning capital infrastructure; supporting innovative
information management and technologies; regulating health care; and funding the health system.

In fall 2024, amendments to the Provincial Health Agencies Act provided the Ministry of Health with
a clear mandate to transform Alberta’s health care delivery and governance. This new, outcome-
focused approach replaces the single regional health authority model with a more integrated
system comprised of four provincial health agencies (PHAs), each focused on a key sector of care:
Primary Care Alberta (PCA), operational since February 1, 2025; Acute Care Alberta (ACA),
operational as of April 1, 2025; Assisted Living Alberta (ALA), established as a legal entity on April
1, 2025; and Recovery Alberta (RA), which began operations on September 1, 2024. These agencies
will work in coordination under the ministry's oversight to improve health outcomes and ensure
greater accountability across the system.

The Ministry of Health currently consists of Alberta Health, ACA, PCA, and the HQCA. The Ministry
of Mental Health and Addiction oversees RA, and the Ministry of Seniors, Community and Social
Services oversees ALA. The alignment of PHAs within the health system is depicted in the chart
below. AHS will continue to have a role in the refocused health care system by concentrating on the
delivery of acute care services. To promote continued alignment within the system, the province
established an Integration Council, which all four PHAs will be a part of. The goal of the Integration
Council is to ensure all ministries, PHAs, and service delivery providers work together to deliver
better health outcomes for Albertans.

The Ministry of Health relies on collaboration with a range of health professionals; partners and
organizations in the health and social sectors; academic and research institutions; First Nations,
Metis Settlements, and the Métis Nation of Alberta; and other orders of government to deliver
health services. The Minister of Health is supported by parliamentary secretaries for rural health
and health workforce engagement.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                          9
Results Analysis



Alberta Health establishes the Government of Alberta’s strategic direction for health. The
department advises the government on health policy, legislation and standards, and public health
concerns; monitors and reports on health system performance; sets policies and priorities for the
electronic/digital health environment; provides oversight; and ensures accountability across the
health system.

ACA, the PHA for acute care, will oversee the governance and coordination of acute care services
across Alberta by working directly with acute care service providers to reduce wait times for
emergency departments (EDs) and surgeries, lower emergency medical services (EMS) response
times, and enhance the overall care experience. The goal is to deliver timelier, more coordinated
acute care services across the province. Alberta acute care providers include AHS, Covenant Health,
the Lamont Health Care Centre and chartered surgical facilities.

PCA, the PHA responsible for the primary care health services sector, coordinates primary health
care services and contributes to the transparent oversight of the health system at the provincial
level. PCA will focus on ensuring every Albertan is attached to a family physician or a nurse
practitioner (NP), providing timely access to high-quality primary care services, and supporting an
integrated team of health professionals to provide comprehensive primary care with appropriate
access to patient health information.

The HQCA works collaboratively with health system partners on a variety of topics and initiatives
to improve patient safety, person-centered care, and overall health service quality across the
province. The HQCA’s role will expand to support Alberta Health and the PHAs to set performance
standards and performance indicators and to support audit and compliance functions.

The Office of the Alberta Health Advocates reports to the Minister of Health to improve patient care
and the health system. The office supports Albertans in navigating the health system and accessing
the appropriate resolution services to address health care concerns, including those specific to the
Alberta Health Act, seniors, their families, and service providers.




10                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



Operational Overview

Department of Health
With direction from the minister, the deputy minister is responsible for the daily operations of the
Department of Health, which is structured as follows:

Deputy Minister’s Office – provides leadership to the health system to ensure the delivery of
quality health services, drives innovation, and builds and maintains collaborative relationships
across government ministries, AHS, the HQCA, and the PHAs. The office provides policy
coordination and issues management for the minister and leadership in priority setting, decision-
making, and operations, as well as ministry correspondence services.

Acute Care Division – leads the province’s renewed focus on acute care services, including
developing standards, monitoring and evaluating the acute care and Emergency Health Services
(EHS) performance, and working with partner divisions to oversee the delivery of hospital care,
urgent care, cancer care, provincial program organ and tissue donation, and transplantation
services clinical operations, surgeries, and EHS. The division also supports strategic policy for acute
care, working with partners to develop solutions for the acute care and EHS sectors, oversees the
governance and legislative compliance of EHS delivery and is currently supporting the
implementation of the new Alberta EMS Standing Committee (AESC).

Finance and Capital Planning Division – develops and manages the ministry’s budget and
oversees financial activities within the Department of Health. The division provides financial advice,
prepares annual financial statements, and leads corporate planning and reporting. The Finance and
Capital Planning Division (FCP) is responsible for AHS accountability, capital planning and
coordination of infrastructure projects with Alberta Infrastructure and AHS. The division also leads
integrated health system planning by developing system planning policies to support a more
coordinated and outcome-focused provincial health care system. Additionally, FCP manages the
department’s grant approval process, provides corporate administrative and contracting services,
and oversees registration, designation and acute care bed survey processes and reporting.

Health Information Systems Division – provides leadership and strategic direction for the
development and implementation of policy and standards for the provincial eHealth environment,
and the Department of Health. The division is responsible for Alberta Netcare (electronic health
record), Community Information Integration and Central Patient Attachment Registry, Connect
Care (clinical information system), and MyHealth Records (personal health record), including
health information policy and advice, stakeholder engagement, strategic planning and project and
system delivery and operations.

Health Workforce Division – develops and implements health workforce and system policies
related to compensation for insured health care providers and the self-regulation of health
professions. Working in collaboration with stakeholders, the division oversees the implementation
of key health workforce planning and priorities, such as the health workforce strategy, and
provides health workforce planning support, enabling a fiscally sustainable and effective health
workforce to support Albertans’ needs. Together, these initiatives support the government’s
commitment to build a health care system that is sustainable and serves the needs of Albertans.

Indigenous Health Division – leads government efforts to improve the health and well-being of
First Nations, Métis, and Inuit peoples in Alberta through culturally safe health care service
delivery. The division facilitates this by including Indigenous partners’ perspectives and reflecting
patients’ unique health needs across all health program and policy planning. The division leads key
mandate priorities, such as strengthening Alberta Health’s capacity to develop effective health
policy and conduct strategic planning, building respectful and trusting relationships, advancing the


Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                      11
Results Analysis



implementation of the Indigenous Modernizing Alberta’s Primary Health Care System (MAPS)
initiative, and working collaboratively with First Nations, Métis, and Inuit partners, and health
system providers to build a culturally safe health care system.

Pharmaceutical and Supplementary Benefits Division – oversees and provides governance to the
Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan (AHCIP) and all government-sponsored supplementary health
benefits programs (i.e., Coverage for Seniors, Non-Group Coverage, Assured Income for the Severely
Handicapped, Income Support, Alberta Adult/Child Health Benefit programs, Ukrainian Evacuee
Health Benefit, Alberta Aids to Daily Living, and Dental and Optical Assistance for Seniors) that
provide Albertans with pharmaceutical, optical, dental, and other medical supports (wheelchairs,
prosthetics, oxygen, medical/surgical supplies, etc.). The division is also responsible for Alberta’s
participation in the National Blood Program and advising the minister in their role as a corporate
member of Canadian Blood Services.

Primary Care and Rural Health Division – responsible for developing policy and performance
oversight of primary care, including new primary care agency (Primary Care Alberta) and models
(e.g., Regional Primary Health Care Networks) and developing related accountability mechanisms,
such as standards, guidelines, and legislative tools. The division is also responsible for developing
and implementing key policy initiatives aligned with the government’s renewed focus on primary
care, such as the implementation of the MAPS initiative, supporting the administration and
governance of Primary Care Networks (PCNs), and strengthening relationships with key
stakeholders. The division will oversee primary and community health; chronic disease
management; and the administration and governance of PCNs to meet the needs of Albertans. The
division collaborates with stakeholders, such as physicians, NPs, registered nurses, licensed
practical nurses, health professions’ regulatory colleges, and health system leaders from academia
and the community to support the provision of quality primary health care services to Albertans.
The mandate of the division is achieved through evidence-informed and value-oriented initiatives,
promotion of the patient medical home initiative through PCNs and their governance structure,
performance monitoring and evaluation, and collaboration with health professions’ regulatory
colleges to support patient safety. The division is also responsible for the development of rural
health-related policy and is responsible for ensuring that rural and remote perspectives are
considered and incorporated in Alberta Health policies.

Public Health Division – provides strategic direction and leadership on emerging public health
risks, communicable diseases, immunization, compliance monitoring, environmental public health,
newborn screening, health promotion, and emergency preparedness, response and recovery,
through the assessment, development and implementation of provincial policies, regulations,
strategies, and standards. The division carries out these functions to support innovation and
engagement with Albertans towards wellness, health promotion, and injury and disease prevention.
To support health system quality, the division collaborates with partners to perform compliance
and monitoring activities, and enforcement of the acts, regulations and standards administered by
the division in the areas of infection prevention and control oversight, and protection for persons
receiving certain care or support services.

Strategic Policy and Performance Division – responsible for providing leadership for health care
research and innovation, including monitoring, assessing, and improving health system
performance. The division is the primary source for Alberta’s overall health system data standards
and analytics, evaluating the health system’s performance to support evidence-based policy
decisions for all health sectors. The division is also responsible for the Freedom of Information and
Protection of Privacy Act (FOIP), legislative planning, strategic policy coordination, governance of
over 45 health public agencies and over 70 heath foundations (including 450 member
opportunities), and all Cabinet-related materials, as well as intergovernmental relations. The



12                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                     Results Analysis



division works with other divisions to develop performance and reporting standards for the health
care system.

System Refocusing Division – responsible for implementing the new direction for Alberta's health
care system to improve health outcomes for Albertans and empower health care workers to deliver
quality care across the province. This includes supporting the transition to a unified provincial
health care system by helping establish governance structures and operational processes for the
newly created sector-based PHAs for acute care, continuing care, primary care, and mental health
and addiction. The division also supports ministry divisions, AHS, and system partners in aligning
with the new direction, and engages with health care workers and members of the public to
understand the current system needs and support for a smooth transition. In addition, the division
provides secretariat support to the Integration Council, which is tasked with guiding and
monitoring the implementation of the integrated health system and ensuring coordination across
all PHAs.

Office of the Chief Medical Officer of Health – monitors and reports on the health of Albertans and
advises on actions to protect and promote the health of the public under authority of the Public
Health Act. This includes legislated responsibilities related to disease surveillance, communicable
disease outbreaks, infection prevention and control measures, health risk assessments, and states
of public health emergencies. The Office of the Chief Medical Officer of Health provides strategic
leadership, oversight, support and clinical expertise on issues of public health importance to
Albertans. The office works closely with diverse partners within and beyond the health system,
including the Department of Health’s Public Health Division, Primary Care and Rural Health
Division, Medical Officers of Health at AHS, and Indigenous Services Canada to facilitate policies,
processes and programs to prevent chronic diseases, control the spread of communicable diseases,
support health surveillance, and strengthen the public health system in Alberta.

Communications and Public Engagement [CPE]-Health –provides Albertans and health system
partners with information about ministry policies, programs, and initiatives. The CPE-Health team
works with department staff to develop and implement communication plans and offers
communications support, such as media relations, issues management, writing and editing services,
product development, and online communications services. CPE-Health also works closely with
AHS and other reporting entities to coordinate ministry communications.

Health Law – through Alberta Justice, a team of lawyers support all aspects of the Department of
Health’s activities, ranging from grant agreements and contracting and procurement to developing
and interpreting legislation and general legal advice to the ministry.

Human Resources – through the Public Service Commission, Human Resources is dedicated to
delivering programs, supporting initiatives, and providing human resource expertise and services
that attract, retain, and engage the department’s workforce. The branch works in partnership with
managers and employees to build and sustain workforce capacity to achieve business goals and
create an environment where employees are respected, valued, engaged and resilient.

Procurement and System Optimization Secretariat – ensures procurement frameworks are
developed and maintained to support health care contract management related to services and
commodities, including governance, risk management, performance management, compliance, and
public accountability. The secretariat supports system-wide optimization (i.e., cross-sector
optimization projects, etc.) and leads development of standing offers for system-wide ancillary
services to support system-wide optimization, where appropriate. The secretariat establishes
spending and urgency thresholds to support local procurement and decision-making. The overall
goal is to provide a system-wide procurement oversight function to ensure efficient, open, and
transparent procurement processes are maintained for safeguarding public funds, supporting


Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                   13
Results Analysis



Alberta's health service delivery partners, while adapting to local needs where required and where
it makes sense




14                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



Key Highlights
The Ministry of Health focused on accomplishing [number of outcomes] identified in the 2023-26
Ministry Business Plan:

•    Enhanced timely access to an effective, safe and responsive publicly funded health care
     system that provides Albertans with the necessary care when and where they need it.
• A modernized and refocused health care system that is fiscally sustainable and delivers the
     highest-quality patient care to all Albertans, including indigenous peoples, regardless of
     where they reside in the province.
• The health and well-being of all Albertans is protected, supported and improved, and health
     inequities among underserved populations, including indigenous peoples, are reduced.
Key highlights and results achieved by the Ministry of Health in 2024-25 include:

    Reducing Surgical Wait         Alberta Health continued to reduce surgical wait times in 2024-25
    Times through Alberta          through initiatives under the Alberta Surgical Initiative (ASI),
    Surgical Initiative            including centralized referrals and expanded use of CSFs. By March
                                   31, 2025, 318,601 surgeries were completed, exceeding the target of
                                   310,000 and up 4.6 per cent from the previous year. About 74,928
                                   patients remained on the wait list, with 57.8 per cent within
                                   clinically recommended timelines.

                                   CSFs performed 64,500 surgeries (20.2 per cent of all scheduled
                                   procedures). Rural surgical volumes rose 4.4 per cent, and cancer
                                   surgeries increased 9.4 per cent, with 55 per cent completed within
                                   benchmark timelines.

    EHS Improvements               In 2024-25, Alberta invested $704 million in Emergency Health
                                   Service (EHS). EMS Return to Service initiatives reduced average
                                   hospital handover times. The replacement of end-of-life EMS
                                   vehicles was funded through the EMS Vehicle Capital Grant Program,
                                   with a total of $15 million in 2024-25 toward a $35-million, three-
                                   year investment in this program. This funding supports the
                                   purchase of new EHS vehicles and provides additional equipment to
                                   meet the needs of Albertans in both urban and rural areas of the
                                   province.

    Access to Cancer Care and      The Arthur J.E. Child Comprehensive Cancer Centre opened in
    Diagnostics                    Calgary on October 28, 2024. The $1.4-billion facility includes 160
                                   inpatient beds and 90 chemotherapy spaces. It will add a new
                                   clinical trial space in late 2025 and expand based on patient and
                                   clinical needs.

    Investment in Rural Health     To address rural health care needs, Alberta invested over $7.06
    Workforce                      million in 2024-25 through the Rural Health Professions Action Plan
                                   (RhPAP). An additional $2 million supported Indigenous second
                                   birth attendants. As of March 31, 2025, 53 NPs began providing care
                                   across zones, including four NPs on First Nation communities or
                                   Metis Settlements. Other investments in rural health workforce
                                   included: continued support for rural physician education
                                   programs; financial incentives for rural physicians, such as the Rural
                                   Remote Northern Program; AHS’ targeted recruitment of


Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                      15
Results Analysis



                            internationally educated nurses; the launch of the Rural and Remote
                            Family Medicine Resident Physician Bursary Pilot Program; and
                            continued implementation of the Alberta Medical Association (AMA)
                            Agreement. The Indigenous Wellness Program Alternative
                            Relationship Plan was also established in 2014 to overcome
                            geographical, economic, political, cultural, and socio-historical
                            barriers faced by First Nations, Métis, and Inuit patients, and
                            continues to expand to support delivery to an increasing number of
                            First Nations, Métis and Inuit communities. In 2024-25, 43 family
                            physicians worked under this plan across Alberta.

 Strengthening Primary      In 2024-25, the Government of Alberta continued to implement the
 Health Care                Modernizing Alberta’s Primary Health Care System (MAPS) initiative
                            that was launched in September 2022 to address urgent system
                            pressures and improve access to care. Following the release of MAPS
                            final reports in October 2023, the MAPS Two-Year Implementation
                            Plan was released in April 2024, which outlined a series of actions to
                            strengthen and stabilize primary health care in Alberta. In June
                            2024, an interactive dashboard publicly reported the progress of the
                            actions.

                            Budget 2024 invested $475 million to support the continued
                            implementation of the MAPS initiative, including: $100 million to
                            improve access to family physicians; $10 million for primary health
                            care initiatives in Indigenous communities; $17 million to further
                            develop a compensation model for nurse practitioners; $24.3 million
                            to support panel management and practice improvement activities;
                            and $30 million to address the needs of underserved populations.
                            The funding is dedicated to implementing the MAPS
                            recommendations aimed at strengthening primary health care
                            across the province.

 Health System Refocusing   In 2024-25, the Government of Alberta advanced transformation of
 Initiatives                the health system by establishing three sector-based PHAs for acute
                            care, mental health and addiction, and primary care – while work
                            was underway to establish stablished four Provincial Health
                            Agencies—ACA, ALA, PCA, and RA—to deliver more specialized and
                            integrated care across Alberta, with phased launches between 2024
                            and 2025. These agencies form the core of a unified provincial
                            health care framework designed to improve accountability,
                            integration, and patient-centred care.

 Digital Health             In 2024-25, the Government of Alberta continued to enhance digital
 Modernization              access to health information as part of its commitment to a person-
                            centred health care model. Progress included expanding the
                            information available through the MyHealth Records (MHR) portal
                            and integrating community primary care data into Alberta’s
                            Electronic Health Record, Alberta Netcare, Community Information
                            Integration and Central Patient Attachment Registry, and Connect
                            Care to support informed clinic decision-making. By March 31, 2025,
                            there were over 1.9 million MHRs users, with an average of 32,000
                            daily log ins. In addition, over 2,100 physician offices and 1,700
                            community pharmacies were using Alberta Netcare. Connect Care


16                                                                   Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                         Results Analysis



                                   supports approximately 125,000 staff, physicians, and clinicians
                                   across AHS, its affiliates, and operating provincial health agencies
                                   across Alberta.

 Diagnostic Imaging                Alberta allocated $15 million in 2024-25 for additional CT and MRI
 Enhancements                      scans, targeting 41,000 more CT and 12,000 more MRI scans. While
                                   the proportion of patients seen within provincial wait time targets
                                   remained stable for CT scans and declined marginally for MRIs,
                                   median wait times improved, including for community lab services.

 Advancing Public and              In 2024-25, Alberta Health invested $148 million to safeguard public
 Population Health                 and population health through initiatives focused on disease
                                   surveillance, immunization, chronic disease prevention,
                                   environmental health, food safety, and injury prevention. The fall
                                   outreach immunization campaign was launched on October 1, 2024,
                                   and by March 31, 2025, 21 per cent of Albertans had received an
                                   influenza flu vaccine and 13.6 per cent a COVID-19 vaccine. Ongoing
                                   efforts targeted chronic conditions like diabetes and cancer, as well
                                   as communicable diseases, including measles, shigellosis, Mpox,
                                   sexually transmitted and blood-borne infections, and respiratory
                                   viruses, such as influenza and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). In
                                   December 2024, Alberta joined the National Strategy for Drugs for
                                   Rare Diseases, securing $54 million per year over three years to
                                   expand access to cutting-edge therapies and improve rare disease
                                   diagnostics.

 Improving Health Equity           In 2024-25, Alberta Health advanced its commitment to health
 for Indigenous                    equity by expanding access to culturally safe, community-based care
 Communities                       for First Nations, Métis and Inuit peoples guided by the
                                   recommendations of the MAPS initiative. The Indigenous Primary
                                   Health Care Innovation Fund provided $20 million in funding over
                                   two years to support Indigenous-led programs. Eighteen grant
                                   recipients will receive $7.6 million in funding over three years
                                   through the Indigenous Patient Navigator Grant Program to help
                                   improve access to primary care services closer to home. The
                                   Government of Canada contributed an additional $6.3 million over
                                   three years to launch a second round of navigator funding, leading to
                                   the creation of the Bilateral Indigenous Patient Navigator Grant
                                   Program. Budget 2024 committed approximately $2 million over
                                   three years, of which $333,000 was provided to two Indigenous
                                   post-secondary institutions to develop and deliver First Nations-
                                   infused health care aide training. Budget 2024 also invested $1.4
                                   million to an Indigenous organization - Kihew Awasis Wakimik
                                   Cultural Society, to offer second birth attendant program.


The Ministry of Health remains committed to regulatory approaches and program delivery that
reduces unnecessary government oversight and emphasizes outcomes, to improve access to
government services, attract investment, support innovation and competitiveness, and grow
Alberta businesses.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                       17
Results Analysis




Discussion and Analysis of Results
Actions that support the priorities of the Government of Alberta Strategic Plan



 Key Priority 2: Investing in Albertans


 Ensuring an accessible, responsive, and refocused health care system

 Refocusing the health care system to improve access and patient outcomes while empowering
 Alberta’s front-line health care workers. This refocusing work will create a unified health system
 with provincial sector-based health agencies that centre around four dedicated organizations:
 primary care, acute care, continuing care, and mental health and addiction. Alberta Health
 Services will continue to deliver acute care services, and an Integration Council will ensure the
 system is in alignment to better deliver health outcomes.

 Detailed reporting found on pages 32, 33, 35, 37 (Key Objectives 1.3, 1.4, 2.1, & 2.2)

 Improving access for underserved populations including First Nations, Métis, and Inuit peoples
 to quality and culturally appropriate health services that support improved health outcomes by
 promoting and exploring novel, innovative, and creative strategies.

 Detailed reporting found on pages 40, 46, 50, 51 (Key Objectives 2.4, 3.1, 3.3, & 3.4)

 Improving access to family doctors and health professionals. Government is working with the
 Alberta Medical Association to implement new payment models for family physicians while
 finding ways to reduce their administrative workload and allocating $57 million over three years
 to help doctors and nurse practitioners working in primary care manage costs of increased
 patient caseload. An additional $200 million over two years will improve access to family
 physicians and help ensure primary health care is available for every Albertan when and where
 they need it. Government is also emphasizing alternative models of care, such as access to team-
 based care and integration between primary health care and community care.

 Detailed reporting found on pages 29, 33 (Key Objectives 1.2 & 1.4)

 Improving Emergency Medical Services system response times, reducing emergency department
 and surgical wait times, and resolving laboratory and diagnostic services delays to ensure
 patients are receiving the appropriate level of care as well as empowering front-line workers to
 better deliver health care services.

 Detailed reporting found on page 20 (Key Objective 1.1)

 Strengthening and modernizing continuing care, primary health care, and digital health systems
 to increase choice, equitable and timely access, improving the quality of care for Albertans.

 Detailed reporting found on pages 20, 32, 39, 40, 42 (Key Objectives 1.1, 1.3, 2.3, 2.4, & 2.5)




18                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Results Analysis




 Addressing health care staffing challenges by investing $164 million in 2024-25 towards
 initiatives to train, recruit, and retain more health care professionals for Alberta. This work is
 supported by Alberta’s Health Workforce Strategy and the Rural Health Professions Action Plan,
 addressing specific challenges in remote and rural communities, as well as creating additional
 seats for physician education at Alberta’s medical schools.

 Detailed reporting found on page 29 (Key Objective 1.2)

 Addressing the province’s critical nursing shortage by making it easier for credentialed nurses
 from outside of Alberta/Canada to bring their skills to Alberta patients. Government is attracting
 internationally educated nurses by streamlining immigration processes for health care
 professionals and by addressing barriers they face when coming to Canada, including navigating
 regulatory requirements, assessment, and licensing processes, and having access to bridging
 education and clinical placements if needed.

 Detailed reporting found on pages 29, 33 (Key Objectives 1.2 & 1.4)

 Increasing access to maternal care by investing over $10 million over the next three years to
 develop and implement Alberta’s Midwifery Strategy, reducing pressure on hospitals and
 improving access to maternity care in rural and remote areas.

 Detailed reporting found on pages 46, 51 (Key Objectives 3.1 & 3.4)

 Investing $4.5 billion over three years in capital funding to maintain or expand health care
 facilities across the province. This includes funding for the redevelopment and expansion of the
 Red Deer Regional Hospital Centre, which will increase critical services and add capacity to one
 of the largest hospitals in central Alberta.

 Detailed reporting found on pages 46, 51 (Key Objectives 3.1 & 3.4)

 Forming lasting and meaningful partnerships with Indigenous communities:

 Working with the federal government and First Nations, Métis and Inuit communities to improve
 access for Indigenous Peoples no matter where they reside in the province. Working with the
 federal government, and First Nations, Métis and Inuit communities to improve access to key
 services such as education and healthcare for Indigenous peoples, no matter where they reside
 in the province.

 Detailed reporting found on pages 39, 40, 50 (Key Objectives 2.3, 2.4, & 3.3)




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                      19
Results Analysis



Outcome One: Enhanced timely access to an effective, safe and responsive publicly
funded health care system that provides Albertans with the necessary care when and
where they need it
Alberta’s government continues to make health care more accessible and responsive by building
health system capacity to support Albertans’ health and well-being throughout their lives, ensuring
an integrated and high-quality health care delivery that provides the highest levels of service to
Albertans and timely access to the most appropriate care in the most appropriate setting.

Key Objectives

1.1       Increased access to health care services for Albertans by improving the Emergency
          Medical Services system, reducing surgical wait times, decreasing emergency
          department wait times, reducing laboratory and diagnostic services delays, and
          improve primary health care across the province

A key priority for the Alberta government in 2024-25 was to continue strengthening the health care
system, making it more effective and accessible. Alberta Health remained focused on prioritizing
health system capacity to ensure a high-quality health system that meets patients’ needs and
provides access to the most appropriate care in the most suitable setting. This included building
surgical, and intensive care unit (ICU) capacities, as well as strengthening the health workforce.
Several initiatives were implemented to expand the capacity of Alberta’s publicly funded health
care system and minimize disruptions to patient care.

The Government of Alberta remained committed to increasing surgical capacity to keep pace with
demand and reduce the length of time Albertans waited for scheduled surgeries. Efforts continued
to improve the patient journey by streamlining care coordination and surgical pathways,
supporting family physicians with earlier specialist advice before consultations, and centralizing
referrals to match patients with the right surgeon faster. Alberta Health addressed urgent health
care needs while working towards a more resilient and efficient health care system for Albertans
with four key goals:

      •        Decreasing emergency department (ED) wait times
      •        Improving emergency medical services (EMS) response times
      •        Reducing wait times for surgeries
      •        Empowering front-line workers to deliver health care

The ministry implemented the Alberta Surgical Initiative (ASI), a surgical access improvement plan
with a patient-first focus to reduce surgery wait lists, wait times, and strengthen surgical services in
Alberta. This ensures that Albertans have surgeries within clinically recommended wait times. As
part of the ASI, Alberta Health worked with Alberta Health Services (AHS) to improve and
standardize the entire surgical journey by:

      •        Prioritizing surgeries and allocating operating room time according to the greatest need
      •        Streamlining referrals from primary care to specialists
      •        Increasing surgeries at underutilized operating rooms (mainly in rural areas)
      •        Providing lower-risk, routine surgeries through accredited chartered surgical facilities
               (CSFs) to help provide publicly funded insured services and extend existing capacity in
               hospitals



20                                                                           Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                            Results Analysis




As part of ASI, the second operating room at the Rocky Mountain House Health Centre became
operational in April 2024. This project supports the government’s commitment to improve access
to timely surgical care for Albertans, particularly in rural communities.

The expansion project added 4,736 square feet of new space, including:

    •        A new operating room
    •        Six additional recovery beds
    •        A patient support area
    •        An upgraded medical device reprocessing department

This investment enables the facility to provide approximately 120 surgeries per month,
significantly enhancing rural surgical capacity and reducing the need for patients to travel long
distances for care.

ED Wait Times, EHS Performance, and Workforce Initiatives

The Government of Alberta implemented several initiatives in 2024-25 to reduce ED wait times by
increasing front-line staff capacity and improving patient flow. As of March 2025, there were 3,888
AHS nurses (including registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, and health care aides) working
in EDs —157 more than the previous year. Between April 1, 2024, and March 31, 2025, 83 ED
physicians were recruited, including:

    •        Physicians with a specialty designation
    •        Family physicians with additional emergency medicine certification
    •        Family physicians working in EDs without added credentials (Note: Covenant Health
             physicians are not included in these totals.)

Performance Measure 1.a:
     Emergency department wait times: 90th percentile time to initial physician assessment
     in the 16 largest sites (in hours)

                                                                                    2024-25      2024-25
                                      2021-22          2022-23         2023-24
                                                                                     Target       Actual

 ED wait times: 90th
                                                                                     Below
 percentile time to initial
                                       4.5*             6.2*              6.7       2023-24         7.0
 physician assessment in
                                                                                     results
 the 16 largest sites (hours)1
Source: Emergency Department Visit Data Repository, Emergency Department Information Systems, AHS
1A lower time indicates faster access to care.

*The methodology was revised to exclude data for patients that ‘Left Without Being Seen’ and results were
updated from 4.6 to 4.5 hours in 2021-22 and 6.3 to 6.2 hours in 2022-23.

The performance measure on ED wait times tracks the time to see a physician after being triaged on
arrival 90 per cent of the time in the 16 largest hospitals. The lower the number the better, as it
demonstrates patients are receiving timely assessment and treatment in EDs. In 2024-25, the wait
time to see a physician in the ED was 7.0 hours compared to 6.7 hours in 2023-24. The trend shows


Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                            21
Results Analysis



that patients were waiting 0.3 hours longer in the ED to see a physician in 2024-25 compared with
last year. The longer ED wait times was due to an increase in ED visits and the number of patients
with the highest level of acuity that require aggressive interventions such as patients with cardiac
arrest or major trauma.

An approximate 2.6 per cent increase in total ED visits and a 4.0 per cent increase in high-acuity
presentations were observed in 2024-25. In addition, hospital overcrowding and delays in
transferring patients to continuing care settings contributed to extended wait times.

To address these pressures, Alberta Health worked on initiatives such as:

     •       Expanding community care alternatives to divert non-urgent cases
     •       Improving access to continuing care beds
     •       Increasing hospital capacity
     •       Implementing streamlined patient discharge and treatment protocols in acute care.

EHS System Improvements

In 2024-25, the government spent $704 million to expand EHS and respond to the 98
recommendations from the Alberta Emergency Services Provincial Advisory Committee (AEPAC)
and the EHS Dispatch Review.

A new Alberta EMS Standing Committee was established and began meeting on April 24, 2024. This
committee includes frontline paramedics, municipal and Indigenous representatives, and other
community partners. Subcommittees address air ambulance, dispatch, ground ambulance, medical
first response, and workforce. The core committee meets monthly, while subcommittees meet
every eight weeks. These advisory groups are mandated until spring 2027.

Performance Measure 1.b:
     EMS 90th percentile response times (minutes) for the most urgent (life threatening)
     calls

                                     EMS Response Time for the Most Urgent Calls (minutes) 1

                                                                                                   2024-25
                               2021-22         2022-23        2023-24       2024-25 Target
                                                                                                    Actual
 Metro/urban                                                                Below 2023-24
                                 14.6            17.5           13.8                                 14.2
 communities                                                                    results
 Communities with                                                           Below 2023-24
                                 18.6            18.9           16.3                                 16.4
 over 3,000 residents                                                           results
 Rural communities
                                                                            Below 2023-24
 with under 3,000                33.8            33.9           33.3                                 29.2
                                                                                results
 residents
 Remote                                                                     Below 2023-24
                                 55.4            61.8           64.9                                 52.0
 communities                                                                    results
Source: EMS Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD) data captured with EMS Communications Centres, Alberta Health




22                                                                                Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                         Results Analysis



Notes: 1 Measures 90th percentile, meaning these are the response times for 90 per cent of activity. Sites that experienced
less than 20 events were excluded from the calculations.

EMS response times for 90 per cent of activity dropped between 2023-24 to 2024-25 for remote
communities and for rural community residents. However, EMS response times for 90 per cent of
activity were similar for communities with more than 3,000 residents and have slightly increased
for metro/urban communities over this same period. It is important to note that the very low call
volumes in the two rural and remote categories result in high sensitivity of response times to
changes in performance.

Alberta’s government is committed to ensuring EMS is available to Albertans when and where they
need it. Alberta Health and AHS continued working to divert low-acuity calls to 811, reduce EMS
offload times, and free up ambulances faster.

The EMS Return to Service initiative, launched in 2023, helped reduce handover time from
paramedics to ED staff. Average handover time dropped from 1.7 hours in December 2024 to 1.6
hours in February 2025. In January 2025, paramedics gained view-only access to Connect Care,
enabling real-time access to patient histories and improving on-site decision-making.

Surgical Volumes and Cancer Care Outcomes

In 2024-25, significant progress was achieved in expanding surgical capacity as part of the ASI
implementation. CSFs enabled a greater volume of publicly funded surgeries at no cost to patients
and continued to be an integral part of the ASI. There is a total of 48 CSF agreements, of which 20
pertain to oral and maxillofacial surgery (OMF) and are contracted directly with the surgeons
rather than through the CSF. Only one new agreement was established in the 2023-24 financial year
for Ear, Nose and Throat (ENT) (CLM208529), which is included in the total count. No new
agreements have been initiated for the 2024-25 financial year. CSFs remain an extension of hospital
capacity and are used in many other Canadian health systems. Under the Health Facilities Act, CSFs
providing publicly funded insured services must be accredited by the College of Physicians and
Surgeons of Alberta (CPSA) and have a signed service contract with AHS.

Through these dedicated efforts, as of March 31, 2025, approximately 318,601 surgeries had been
completed, surpassing the 2024-25 fiscal year target of 310,000. This represents an increase of
14,006 surgeries, or 4.6 per cent, compared with the 304,595 completed in 2023-24.

As of March 31, 2025, 74,928 cases were waiting for surgery. Of these cases, 57.8 per cent were
waiting within clinically recommended timelines. Efforts remain underway to reduce wait times
further and ensure equitable access across the province.

For the fiscal year 2024-25, 52,810 cases have been completed in rural acute care facilities. This
represents an increase in rural hospitals of 5.4 per cent in volumes completed in 2024-25
compared with fiscal year 2023-24, when 50,090 surgeries were completed.

Further, approximately 23,015 cancer surgeries were completed in 2024-25, a 9.4 per cent increase
compared with the same period in 2023-24. Nearly 55 per cent of cancer surgeries were completed
within clinically recommended wait times, helping to ensure patients receive timely access to
potentially life-saving procedures.

The Arthur J.E. Child Comprehensive Cancer Centre became fully operational on October 28, 2024.
The centre provides additional capacity for timely access to cancer diagnostics and treatment,
supporting optimal health outcomes for cancer patients. This new cancer centre in Calgary engages
patients at the centre of a multidisciplinary health system and offers a world-class environment for


Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                        23
Results Analysis



cancer care. There are 160 inpatient beds and 90 chemotherapy treatment spaces available to meet
patient needs. All clinical areas are in use with flexibility for future growth as demand increases. A
new clinical trial space is expected to open later in 2025, with additional program expansions
guided by patient and clinical priorities.

In 2024-25, Alberta Health provided Wellspring Alberta with over $300,000 in funding to expand
non-clinical, psycho-social cancer care support services for remote and rural areas, including
Indigenous communities. With this grant, Wellspring Alberta is expanding both online and in-
person programming to improve access to supportive care, strengthen mental health outcomes, and
promote equity in the cancer care experience. Participants have reported improved well-being as a
result of the expanded services.

System Initiatives and Workforce Investments

The increase in completed surgical procedures this year reflects meaningful progress in expanding
Alberta’s surgical capacity and reducing wait times. This outcome demonstrates the Ministry of
Health’s continued commitment to the ASI. Building on this progress, the ministry implemented
system-wide improvements—including enhanced surgical referral pathways, prioritization based
on clinical urgency and continued use of CSFs-to deliver less-complex procedures efficiently.

Percentage of surgical procedures that met national wait time benchmarks

       Surgery (national benchmark)                                  Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                                                2024-25
                                                                                                                Actual
                                                       2020-21       2021-22       2022-23        2023-24

 Hip replacement 1
                                                       51.6%         51.2%          43.0%          62.4%        72.8%
 (benchmark 182 days)

 Knee replacement 2
                                                       43.3%         39.7%          32.5%          53.3%        62.5%
 (benchmark 182 days)

 Cataract surgery
                                                       45.3%         64.7%          64.7%          59.7%        62.8%
 (benchmark 112 days)

Source: Local Operating Room (OR) Information Systems, AHS and OR Data Repository, AHS
1Hip replacement data include totals, partials, resurfacings, primaries, and revisions for scheduled/elective cases.

2Knee replacement data include totals, partials, primaries and revisions for scheduled/elective cases.



The 2024-25 results for hip, knee and cataract surgical procedures included in this indicator show
an increase in the number of Albertans receiving these surgical procedures within national
benchmark wait times when compared with 2023-24 results.

Hip replacements increased from 62.4 per cent to 72.8 per cent, and knee replacements improved
from 53.3 per cent to 62.5 per cent. In addition to improved compliance with the national
benchmark for hips and knees, the overall number of surgeries for all three procedures has
increased at the same time.

In 2023–24, 59.7 per cent of cataract surgeries met the national benchmark, a five-percentage point
decline from the previous year. This drop is attributed to prioritizing patients who had waited the
longest, which lowered the percentage within target despite over 500 more surgeries being
completed on time. In 2024-25, performance improved to 62.8 per cent, reflecting recovery from
backlog reduction efforts.


24                                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



Alberta’s government continues to work with AHS to ensure more Albertans receive their surgeries
in a timely manner. Efforts are ongoing to implement an $8.2-million grant provided by Alberta
Health to further initiatives. The funds support AHS in implementing surgical smoothing
techniques—such as separating scheduled and urgent surgeries into different operating rooms—to
improve patient flow through Alberta’s busiest hospitals. AHS partnered with the Institute for
Healthcare Optimization (IHO) to implement these methods. As of 2024-25, six hospitals had
implemented the IHO methodology in Phase 1, with 10 more scheduled for Phase 2.

Under the ASI, Alberta performed more surgeries in rural communities and performed more
publicly funded surgeries at CSFs. In fiscal year 2024-25, an additional 2,180 surgeries were
completed in rural facilities compared with fiscal year 2023-24, while an additional 2,500 cases
were completed at CSFs. Overall, approaches like these, and others, facilitated the completion of
more surgeries in 2024-25 than any prior fiscal year, with a total of approximately 318,601 cases
completed and more than 13,000 additional surgeries compared to the year prior.

In 2024-25, Alberta Health also amended a prior grant to the CPSA to provide additional funding to
support expanding accreditation activities, in line with growth in CSF procedures. This builds on a
previous Alberta Health grant and helps CPSA continue meeting its accreditation obligations.

Alberta Health entered into several agreements with AHS to implement ASI-related projects:

    •        Invested over $3 million in the Rapid Access Clinics program to provide faster, more
             efficient access to care for musculoskeletal conditions.
    •        AHS launched a $2.7 million prehabilitation pilot, helping patients prepare for surgery
             with education and supports. As of March 2025, 2,258 referrals had been received and
             3,998 visits completed, with 84 per cent of participants reporting proved surgical
             recovery.
    •        Allocated over $800,000 to the Rural Surgical and Obstetrical Network of Alberta to
             enhance surgical and maternity care in rural communities.
    •        Provided over $1.1 million in funding to support CPSA regulatory oversight and
             accreditation related to CSFs and the monitoring of, and response to, safety incidents.
The Government of Alberta continued to address surgical workforce challenges to support system
expansion. As of March 31, 2025, there were 466 anesthesiologists registered in Alberta, up from
455 in 2024, representing a 2.4 per cent increase.

In July 2024, the Royal Alexandra Hospital experienced a temporary disruption in orthopedic
services due to staffing shortages. To address this, Alberta Health and AHS collaborated on a
strategic action plan to restore orthopedic surgery capacity. This included resuming procedures at
reduced volumes, prioritizing patients on wait lists, and continuing overnight-stay surgeries. AHS
also maintained recruitment efforts to restore full physician coverage and mitigate similar
disruptions elsewhere.

Province-wide, AHS continued working to increase operating room hours by addressing workforce
gaps. These efforts included targeted hiring and leadership development. As of January 31, 2025,
Cancer Care Alberta had recruited 41 full-time oncologists, 18 full-time hospitalists, and 115 clinical
operational staff. These investments reflect Alberta’s ongoing efforts to strengthen surgical and
cancer care teams and reduce wait times across the province.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                       25
Results Analysis



Capital Investments, Diagnostic Access, and ICU/NICU Expansion

The Government of Alberta continued investing in medical device reprocessing (MDR) as part of
broader efforts to reduce surgical backlogs and increase operating capacity. A total of $159 million
in funding was allocated across Phase 1 and Phase 2 of the MDR program over three years. These
funds are supporting renovations in nine hospitals: Foothills Medical Centre (Calgary), Westlock
Health Centre, Northern Lights Regional Hospital Centre (Fort McMurray), Sturgeon Community
Hospital (St. Albert), Royal Alexandra Hospital (Edmonton), Grey Nuns Community Hospital
(Edmonton), Misericordia Community Hospital (Edmonton), Alberta Children’s Hospital (Calgary),
and Drumheller Health Centre.

This capital program supports critical upgrades and expansions to sterilization and reprocessing
areas, enhancing compliance with safety standards and improving operational efficiency. All nine
projects advanced through planning and design in 2024-25. As part of the ASI, the province also
provided $313 million over three years for the ASI Capital Program to increase surgical capacity in
18 communities through 39 projects. These initiatives will deliver 21 new and 49 upgraded
operating rooms across both urban and rural locations and include both Alberta Infrastructure-led
and AHS-led projects.

The ministry continued to make strategic infrastructure investments to support the delivery of
publicly funded health services. Significant advancements in 2024-25 included:

     •       Arthur J.E. Child Comprehensive Cancer Centre: A $1.4-billion investment enabled the
             opening of this state-of-the-art centre on October 28, 2024, offering 160 inpatient beds,
             90 chemotherapy spaces, 100-plus exam rooms, 12 radiation vaults (plus 3 shelled for
             future growth), clinical trials space, and full outpatient services.
     •       Red Deer Regional Hospital Centre Redevelopment: Supported by a $1.8-billion
             investment, this project includes a new inpatient tower, expanded ED, and surgical suite
             renovations. Construction of the inpatient tower began in 2024.
     •       Rockyview General Hospital: An $84-million expansion project was completed in
             November 2024, improving intensive care, coronary care, and endoscopy capacity. The
             redevelopment increased the ICU and CCU to 25 single patient rooms (13 ICU and 12
             CCU) from the previous 17 and moved the unit into a space that better supports patient
             and family centred care.
     •       Budget 2024 included $313 million over three years for the Alberta Surgical Initiative
             Capital Program to increase surgical capacity in 18 communities through 39 projects.
             The following projects were completed and became operational:
             o The second operating room at Rocky Mountain House Health Centre became
                operational in April 2024.
             o An operating room upgrade at the McCaig Tower in Foothills Medical Centre in
                Calgary was completed in Dec 2024.
             o Upgrade to two operating rooms, Medical Device Reprocessing Department (MDRD)
                enhancements and inpatient room renovations at Chinook Regional Hospital in
                Lethbridge was completed in Jan 2025.


In Budget 2024, the government allocated $512 million over three years, including $172 million in
2024-25 through the Capital Maintenance and Renewal Program, to maintain existing
infrastructure. The Rural Health Facilities Revitalization Program continued to deliver smaller-scale
renovations in rural communities, helping maintain access to safe, modern care across the province.
Notable projects included renovations to the emergency department at Taber Health Centre


26                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                     Results Analysis



(complete), emergency department triage at Drayton Valley Hospital and Care Centre (substantial
completion), laboratory renovations at Fairview Health Complex (complete), and the purchase and
installation of a CT scanner at Pincher Creek Health Centre (complete).

Percentage of scheduled surgeries performed in Chartered Surgical Facilities

                                                                                                          2024-25
                                                        2021-22         2022-23          2023-24
                                                                                                           Actual

 Percentage of scheduled surgeries
                                                          19%            16.2%           20.5%*            20.2%
 performed in CSFs

Source: Main Operating Room (OR) Information Systems, OR Data Repository, AHS
*AHS Main OR information system sources as extracted to OR data repository as of March 31, 2024. Sites that do not have
OR information systems were not included.

This metric tracks the percentage of scheduled surgeries performed in CSFs. More scheduled
surgeries performed in CSFs helps reduce wait times by increasing surgery volumes and improving
access so that Albertans receive their procedures where and when they are needed. CSFs continue
to be an integral part of the ASI implementation to enable increased volumes of publicly funded
surgeries at no cost to patients. In 2024-25, there were 38 existing CSFs, and accredited CSFs
provided around 64,500 surgeries (20.2 per cent of publicly scheduled surgeries). This is an
increase of around 2,050 surgeries from 2023-24 (3.3 per cent increase).

Annual number of surgeries provided

                           2020-21            2021-22             2022-23            2023-24             2024-25

 Annual
 number of
                          277,000             278,600             294,300            304,595            318,601
 surgeries
 provided

Source: Local Operating Room (OR) Information Systems, AHS, and OR Data Repository, AHS

This performance indicator reflects the estimated number of scheduled and emergency surgeries
that are completed and is used to monitor growth in surgical capacity resulting from
implementation of initiatives such as the ASI and HCAP.

In 2024-25, 318,601 surgeries were performed in Alberta, up by almost 15,000 from 304,595
surgeries in 2023-24. This represents an increase of 4.6 per cent and can in part be credited to the
ASI — the government’s plan to increase the number of surgeries and ensure Albertans receive
their procedures within clinically recommended wait times. Additionally, while the number of
surgeries performed in CSFs continued to rise, this year’s growth reflects a more modest increase
compared to the larger increases seen in previous years. The volume of surgeries performed at
CSFs is expected to continue to increase over the coming years as more CSFs become operational.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                     27
Results Analysis



Percentage of patients seen within established targets for CT scan and MRI scan

                                                         2021-22          2022-23          2023-24          2024-25


 Percentage of MRI scans within
 target*: Percentage of patients seen
                                                           68%              49%              42%              41%
 within established targets for MRI
 scans

 Percentage of CT scans within
 target**: Percentage of patients seen
                                                           87%              80%              80%              80%
 within established targets for CT
 scan

Source: Path to Care DI Dashboard - OWL Production (1.0): Path to Care DI Access Owl - AHS Tableau Server
 *MRI targets: Emergency department patients - within 24 hours; hospital patients - 24-72 hours (condition dependent);
priority 1 scheduled - within 7 days; priority 2 scheduled - within 30 days; priority 3 scheduled - within 90 days
**CT targets: Emergency department patients - within 24 hours; hospital patients - within 24 hours; priority 1 scheduled -
within 7 days; priority 2 scheduled - within 30 days; priority 3 scheduled - within 60 days

The percentage of patients receiving scans within provincial wait time targets remained consistent
for CT scans and declined marginally for MRIs. This trend reflects factors that continue to impact
service delivery, including rising demand and case complexity driven by Alberta’s aging population,
equipment and site infrastructure constraints from further scaling, and workforce recruitment and
retention challenges.

To improve access to diagnostic imaging, the Government of Alberta allocated $15 million in 2024-
25 to community diagnostic imaging providers. With this investment, AHS expects to perform
41,000 additional CT scans and 12,000 additional MRI scans. As a result:

     •       Median CT wait time dropped from 28 to 21 days
     •       Median MRI wait time dropped from 57 to 53 days
     •       AHS delivered approximately 540,000 CT and 230,000 MRI scans in 2024-25
Wait times for community lab services were improved in the following ways:

     •       In-person waits dropped by 36 per cent (35.2 to 22.6 minutes)
     •       Next available appointment wait times decreased by 54 per cent (from 9.3 to 4.4 days)
     •       Patient visits increased by 11 per cent (from 3.94M to 4.38M)
Following the transition of services from DynaLIFE to Alberta Precision Laboratories (APL) in
2023-24, wait times have consistently met or exceeded targets. APL continues to increase staffing
and appointment capacity, and 92 per cent of respondents to a recent patient survey reported
satisfaction with their lab experience.

In 2024, Alberta signed a three-year, approximately $54-million bilateral agreement with the
federal government under the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases. This will provide
earlier access to emerging rare disease drugs, as well as improve diagnostics and screening. Of the
total, up to $5.4 million annually is allocated to improving rare disease screening and testing.




28                                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                          Results Analysis



As part of a $283-million four-year grant through the 2022-26 Business Plan, the government
continued to expand ICU baseline funding to support the development and operation of an
additional 50 permanent ICU beds across the province. As of November 2024, AHS added one more
ICU bed at Foothills Medical Centre, bringing the provincial total to 224 ICU beds.

To address neonatal capacity pressures, an additional 21 neonatal ICU beds were approved. As of
March 31, 2025, six of these beds were operational, increasing Alberta’s total NICU capacity to 315
beds. The new beds were distributed as follows:

      •        3 in Calgary Zone at Peter Lougheed Centre
      •        2 at Grey Nuns Community Hospital and 1 at Misericordia Community Hospital in
               Edmonton Zone
EHS Workforce Development and Response Capacity

Alberta Health worked with AHS to implement workforce strategies aimed at reducing vacancies
among non-casual EHS staff. Between Q1 and Q3 of 2024-25:

      •        The number of primary and advanced care paramedics increased from 3,176 to 3,220;
               and
      •        AHS hired 419 new staff, including 295 paramedics—164 into full-time roles.

To strengthen rural response capacity:

      •        The number of emergency medical responders (EMRs) in the public EMS system grew
               from 80 in November 2022 to 219 by December 2024.
      •        Significant growth occurred in the North Zone and South Zone, with increases across all
               zones.
      •        EMRs continue to serve lower-acuity transfer and response roles, particularly in rural
               and remote areas.
EHS Fleet Expansion

To ensure sufficient vehicle supply, Alberta invested $15 million in 2024-25 toward a $35-million
three-year commitment under the EMS Vehicle Capital Grant Program. This funded the purchase of
new EHS vehicles and provided additional equipment to meet the needs of Albertans in both urban
and rural areas.

As of February 18, 2025, EHS transport volumes were approximately 15 per cent higher than
February 2023, highlighting the importance of fleet growth to meet rising demand.

1.2       Ensure equitable and timely access to health services across the province, including in
          remote, rural and Indigenous communities, by implementing workforce strategies and
          policies to attract, recruit and retain health professionals, and modernizing critical
          capabilities in the delivery of health care services

In 2024-25, Alberta Health advanced efforts to improve maternal health outcomes and reduce
strain on acute care services through the development and implementation of Alberta’s Midwifery
Strategy. Released in February 2025, the strategy provides a long-term framework to guide
investments of up to $10 million in funding over three years to expand midwifery services across
the province, particularly in rural and remote communities with limited access. As of January 2025,


Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                        29
Results Analysis



181 midwives were practising across Alberta, a 26 per cent increase from 2020. In 2024-25, the
first $1.4-million grant under this strategy was established to support the development of
Indigenous second birth attendants, further supporting culturally safe maternity care.

Alberta Health provided over $7.06 million in funding to the Rural Health Professions Action Plan
(RhPAP) in 2024-25. Although the Rural Education Supplement and Integrated Doctor Experience
Program ended March 31, 2024, efforts through RhPAP successfully committed 20 physicians for a
total of 59 years of service in rural Alberta. In 2024-25, RhPAP spent $445,000 to fulfil ongoing
contractual commitments.

Strengthening Health Workforce Capacity and Retention

Alberta Health and the Alberta Medical Association (AMA) completed a joint request for proposals
to review the Rural Remote Northern Program, which provides incentives to attract physicians to
underserved communities. Recommendations from the review are expected by March 31, 2025, and
will inform future improvements. The Government of Alberta also continued to implement its
Health Workforce Strategy, released in December 2024, to strengthen Alberta’s capacity to recruit
and retain health professionals. The number of physicians practising in Alberta increased by 474
(4.2 per cent) from December 2023 to December 2024, demonstrating meaningful year-over-year
growth. This progress builds on the 2023–24 investments in workforce infrastructure and reflects
Alberta’s continued commitment to sustainable physician supply and improved patient access.

Modernizing Primary Care Models

Alberta Health collaborated with the AMA to develop a new Primary Care Physician Compensation
Model (PCPCM) to support family medicine and rural generalist physicians. Implemented on April
1, 2025, this new model is designed to ensure Alberta’s family doctors are competitively
compensated, while delivering patient-centred care, and aims to enhance access to primary care
across the province, particularly in underserved areas.

The PCPCM is structured to:

     •       Encourage physicians to grow their patient panels and support full-time practice.
     •       Reward high-volume, high-quality care through incentives for after-hours access,
             technology use, and team-based service delivery.

As of March 31, 2025, 1059 physicians were approved to apply for PCPCM, of which 818 physicians
submitted PCPCM applications to Alberta Health. This initiative represents a shift from fee for
service to a more integrated, outcome-oriented approach, in line with national best practices and
aligned with Alberta Health Workforce Strategy.

Nurse Practitioner Primary Care Program (NPPCP)

The Nurse Practitioner Primary Care Program (NPPCP) launched on April 1, 2024, as part of
broader efforts to expand access through team-based care. The program provides compensation
that supports nurse practitioners (NPs) so they can practise comprehensive patient care
autonomously, whether in their own practices or in existing primary care settings. As of March 24,
2025:

     •       53 NPs were practising under the NPPCP, of which 20 are practising in rural
             communities.
     •       Over 31,905 patients had been seen through the program.


30                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis



    •        Nearly 21,282 patients were paneled to NPPCP providers as their most responsible
             practitioner.

This early uptake highlights the program’s potential to reduce access barriers and relieve pressure
on the physician system.

Supporting Indigenous Health Access and Equity

The Indigenous Patient Navigator Grant Program that distributed $7.6 million over three years,
continued to address access barriers and navigation challenges faced by First Nations, Métis, and
Inuit patients and communities. The program provides financial support to recruit and retain
patient navigators who assist individuals in accessing primary health care and community services.

In 2024-25:

    •        Alberta Health received 35 applications under the program.
    •        18 Indigenous Patient Navigators were funded across the province.

Building on this success, the Government of Canada contributed an additional $6.3 million over
three years to launch a second round of the Navigator Program through the Bilateral Indigenous
Patient Navigator Grant Program. Combined, total funding under both streams reached $13.9
million over three years.

Through the bilateral program, eligible applicants may receive:

    •        Up to $150,000 annually (or $450,000 over three years)
    •        Support covering salary, benefits, and direct program costs

These navigators continue to play a vital role in advancing culturally safe care and improving
Indigenous patients' experience with Alberta’s health system.

Rural Health Priorities

In October 2024, Alberta Health reaffirmed its commitment to rural and remote care by publishing
the Rural Health Action Plan (RHAP), which is aligned with ongoing system refocusing initiatives,
including the Modernizing Alberta’s Primary Health Care System (MAPS) initiative and Alberta
Health Workforce Strategy.

The RHAP outlines five rural priorities:

    •        Workforce
    •        Access
    •        Models of care
    •        Community care
    •        Prevention and wellness

These priorities reflect continued investment in rural health system readiness and equity of access
for smaller communities.


Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                    31
Results Analysis



Investing in Future Rural Physicians

As of October 2024, the Government of Alberta launched the two-year $16 million Rural and
Remote Family Medicine Resident Physician Bursary Program. The program provides financial
support to family medicine residents at the University of Alberta and University of Calgary who
commit to practising in rural or remote Alberta for a minimum of three years following residency.

In its first year:

      •        Applications opened on January 6, 2025
      •        Approximately $2.8 million was spent to support 21 residents
      •        Bursary recipients are expected to begin service placements in 2025–26

This program builds on Alberta’s ongoing investment in rural physician attraction and aligns with
the broader Health Workforce Strategy by strengthening the rural physician pipeline early in
medical training.

Supporting Community Health Centres

The underserved grant program provided $30 million in funding to support four community health
centres (CHCs): The Alex ($11.6 million) and CUPS Calgary Society ($6.6 million) located in Calgary,
and Jasper Place Wellness Centre ($4.8 million) and Radius Community Health and Healing ($7
million) located in Edmonton. Funds from the grant agreements executed in February 2025 will
enhance the ability of CHCs to deliver team-based, community focused care by:

      •        Enhancing access to primary care for underserved and marginalized populations
      •        Expanding mental health and outreach services
      •        Supporting walk-in and team-based models of care
      •        Providing critical services such as housing navigation, recovery support, and food access
               programs

Modernizing Pharmacy Infrastructure

To support medication safety and modernize infrastructure, the Government of Alberta committed
$57 million over three years to renovate and upgrade 33 pharmacies across the province. This
pharmacy capital program ensures compliance with new sterile compounding standards set by the
National Association of Pharmacy Regulatory Authorities, adopted by the Alberta College of
Pharmacy. This initiative helps ensure consistent access to safe, high-quality pharmaceutical
services in hospitals and care centres, especially in rural and remote areas.

1.3       Ensure processes for resolving patient concerns are effective, streamlined, and
          consistent across the province

The ministry worked to ensure that the patient complaints process remained fair, responsive, and
accessible. AHS implemented targeted enhancements to its complaint management system, with a
focus on strengthening mechanisms for reviewing and addressing feedback from patients and
families in a timely and effective manner.




32                                                                           Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                         Results Analysis



As part of the Alberta government’s continued efforts to strengthen patient-centred care,
transparency, and accountability, the ministry implemented recommendations from the Office of
the Alberta Health Advocate and Mental Health Patient Advocate. Building on progress made in
2023-24, this work included:

      •        Advancing standardized follow-up protocols for patient complaints
      •        Establishing mandatory information-sharing requirements to support a consistent
               approach to resolution across the system

Strengthening the Voice of Patients and Caregivers

In alignment with the MAPS Two-Year Implementation Plan, Alberta Health is supporting the
launch of Care Opinion Canada, an online platform designed to collect public feedback on health
care experiences. The initiative stems from the MAPS advisory panels’ recommendation to
strengthen the voice of patients and caregivers within the health system. In March 2024, $704,000
in MAPS initiative funding was provided to support the pilot launch of Care Opinion by amending
an existing grant with Imagine Citizens Network (ICN). ICN has achieved several key milestones,
including signing a licensing agreement to establish Care Opinion Canada, hiring core staff, and
securing early adopters for a successful pilot of the program.

Improving Culturally Appropriate Complaint Resolution

Building on previous work, the Alberta government continued to improve the process for
addressing Indigenous patient complaints and expanding access to culturally appropriate, high-
quality health services for First Nations, Métis, and Inuit peoples.

In 2024-25, the government hired Alberta’s first Indigenous Patient Safety Investigator and
Advocate, Anthony Cardinal. The role was established to ensure Indigenous patients can advocate
for themselves while also receiving support from a trusted voice when navigating the health
system. The investigator’s mandate includes:

      •        Listening to and supporting Indigenous patients and families in addressing their
               concerns
      •        Ensuring concerns are addressed in culturally safe, appropriate ways
      •        Addressing experiences of racism in the health system
      •        Supporting implementation of the Alberta Health Charter
This appointment aligns with recommendations made by the Indigenous Primary Health Care
Implementation Panel and reinforces Alberta’s commitment to improving trust, access, and
culturally safe care for Indigenous communities.

1.4       Increase oversight to improve safety while reducing red tape within the health system by
          streamlining processes and reducing duplication

As part of its ongoing commitment to regulatory efficiency, the Government of Alberta implemented
red tape reduction initiatives to remove unnecessary administrative barriers and modernize
outdated practices. This included restructuring and modernizing health legislation by removing
unnecessary requirements to access services, and by ensuring that policies reflect modern models
of care. These efforts reduced administrative barriers, strengthened front-line capacity, and
improved patient outcomes.



Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                      33
Results Analysis



Through collaboration with the ministries of Service Alberta and Red Tape Reduction, Health, and
Technology and Innovation, the Government of Alberta is advancing the health card modernization
initiative, which aims to address fraudulent use of the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan (AHCIP).
For example, there are currently more than five million registered paper health cards despite
Alberta’s population being approximately 4.7 million. Options to modernize the health care card,
while improving both its’ security and durability, are under consideration.

The Body of Rules Agreement Netcare Dialog (BRAND) application has been developed to
streamline the operation and management of Alberta Netcare. Once launched, BRAND will result in
a simplified electronic agreement process, significantly reducing administrative burden for
physicians.

Through these targeted initiatives, the ministry remains committed to:

     •       Enhancing timely and equitable access to care
     •       Expanding patient choice
     •       Improving overall quality of services

As these reforms are integrated into a refocused and unified provincial health system, continuous
performance monitoring will ensure transparency, accountability, and better outcomes for
Albertans.




34                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis



Outcome Two: A modernized and refocused health care system that delivers the highest-
quality patient care to all Albertans, including Indigenous Peoples, regardless of where
they reside in the province, and is fiscally sustainable
Alberta is refocusing the health care system to prioritize patient care and empower frontline health
care workers, including those serving rural, remote and Indigenous communities, to deliver the
highest quality health care.

The Ministry of Health is reporting on advancements in palliative and end-of-life care, along with
strengthened licensing and monitoring, as key components of a modernized and fiscally sustainable
health care system that delivers high-quality care to all Albertans.

Key Objectives

2.1       Improve patient outcomes and access through the creation of dedicated organizations
          for acute care, continuing care, and primary care, within a single functioning health
          care system

The Government of Alberta continues to focus on controlling the rising costs of health care while
providing Albertans with the health care services they expect and deserve. In 2024-25, the ministry
worked with health system partners to balance between fiscal responsibility and necessary
investments. The goal is a strong, responsive, and refocused health system that supports economic
growth and world-class health care, with the capacity to respond to emerging public health
challenges.

On October 31, 2024, the Government of Alberta introduced legislative amendments through the
Health Statutes Amendment Act to continue building a health care system that responds to the
changing needs of Albertans. The Health Statutes Amendment Act ensures Albertans have a health
system that prioritizes their need to:

      •        Find a primary care provider
      •        Get urgent care without long wait times
      •        Access high-quality continuing care
      •        Receive mental health and addiction services across the province
These legislative amendments enabled a unified health care system with four provincial health
agencies (PHAs). As part of this refocusing, responsibility for health system planning transitioned
from AHS to Alberta Health. As part of the transition, Alberta Health led a province-wide health
system assessment that looked at current and future health needs, services, workforce, and
infrastructure. The assessment helped shape funding decisions and promoted long-term planning.

The Ministries of Health, Mental Health and Addiction, and Seniors, Community and Social Services
created four PHAs:

      •        Acute Care Alberta (ACA) (operational as of April 1, 2025)
      •        Assisted Living Alberta (ALA) (legal entity as of April 1, 2025)
      •        Primary Care Alberta (PCA) (operational as of February 1, 2025)
      •        Recovery Alberta (RA) (legal entity as of July 1, 2024).




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                     35
Results Analysis



Ministerial orders were signed early to support smooth transitions. Recovery Alberta is led by the
Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction and not covered in this report. Additionally, the
responsibility for the stand-up of the continuing care agency was transferred to the Ministry of
Seniors, Community, and Social Services in fall 2024.

AHS will continue to have a strong role in the refocused system by concentrating on delivering
acute care services. New regulations have been introduced to formalize the designation and
oversight of health services delivery organizations and to establish the AHS Provincial Health
Corporation.

Each PHA has a specific focus. ACA manages hospital care, urgent care centres, CSFs, EHS and
cancer care. ALA oversees continuing care, including care homes and home supports. PCA
coordinates primary health services and works to connect Albertans with care teams. RA
provides recovery-oriented mental health and addiction services and correctional health services in
Alberta.

A health shared services entity (SSE) is being established to provide corporate and support services
for all PHAs and health services delivery organizations. It will be independent and is expected to be
operational by September 2025.

As the system establishes additional organizations, tools are being put in place to make sure it
works collaboratively. The Integration Council was established that looks at system-wide strategic
goals, finds efficiencies, and removes barriers to system coordination. The council began meeting
regularly in March 2024. Membership includes ministers, deputy ministers, PHA and AHS leaders,
and senior executives from HQCA and the Centre of Recovery Excellence.

To enhance local decision-making, Alberta Health will establish 14 regional advisory councils
(RACs) and one Indigenous Advisory Council. RACs and the Indigenous Advisory Council are
guiding Alberta’s health care transformation by ensuring community perspectives are heard. RACs
will provide advice and recommendations on workforce, capital, and clinical service planning,
identify local health issues, and support locally driven solutions. The Indigenous Advisory Council
will bring forward Indigenous priorities, inform culturally appropriate care, and explore integrating
traditional practices. In 2024-25:

     •       Nearly 500 candidates applied and approximately 100 additional individuals were
             nominated by various stakeholders for minister’s consideration to appoint
     •       210 interviews were held
     •       Operational frameworks, policies and other materials were created
     •       Training and onboarding materials for council members were developed
     •       A custom system was built to support council work.


The following other changes have supported the Health Care System Refocusing Initiative:

     •       The management and oversight of all EHS — including ambulances and paramedic
             care — will be transferred from AHS to ACA later in 2025. These changes will help
             refocus EHS to better meet the needs of Albertans and ensure improved access to the
             best health care possible.
     •       Cancer care services will also move out of AHS under the oversight of ACA in 2025.



36                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                          Results Analysis



      •        Services for organ and tissue donation and transplantation will also move out of AHS
               and under the oversight of ACA.
      •        ALA will be operational by fall 2025, aligning medical and non-medical care, increasing
               continuing care spaces, reducing wait times, and offering wraparound supports for
               Albertans who require various levels of care. ALA will support seniors, individuals with
               disabilities, and vulnerable populations needing both temporary and long-term care.
      •        Effective January 6, 2025, the Ministry of Seniors, Community and Social Services
               assumed responsibility for the governance of Alberta’s continuing care sector; however,
               some functions remain in Health, including the License and Compliance Monitoring
               Branch, Continuing Care Information Systems and Medical Assistance in Dying.
In 2024-25, the Procurement and System Optimization Secretariat, Alberta Health division,
continued to work closely with AHS Contracting, Procurement and Supply Management and
program areas to develop and implement contract assignment approaches that will enable the
PHAs to continue the provision of appropriate health care and support to Albertans without
disruption.

A total of 82 contracts were assigned from AHS to PCA effective February 1st, 2025, as per
Ministerial Order 802/2025. These contracts were part of the initial wave of contracts that were
directly related to the transition of programs and services which included Health Link, the
Midwifery Program and the Provincial Primary Health Care Program.

In February 2025, the ministry reported $22.5 million in operational site and zone rebates and
forecasted $288 million in pharmacy and cancer care rebates and $38 million in surgical care
rebates. Additionally, $5.8 million in funding supported education, training, fellowships, and
research – key components of clinical programs enabled through these realized benefits. These
efficiencies support the long-term sustainability of Alberta’s health system and reflect the
ministry’s ongoing efforts to modernize care delivery and optimize resources.

2.2       Engage the health workforce, patients, families, caregivers, and system stakeholders to
          understand front-line and local perspectives to effectively implement the Health Care
          System Refocusing Initiative

In 2024-25, Alberta Health implemented a layered, province-wide engagement strategy to ensure
the voices of Albertans informed the Health Care System Refocusing Initiative. This approach
included in-person public sessions, targeted discussions with Indigenous and francophone
communities, health workforce engagement, and online engagement. The goal was to gather
diverse perspectives and lived experiences to guide the modernization of Alberta’s health care
system and support sustainable, effective, and locally responsive care.

Public Engagement

Between January 24 and April 12, 2024, the Government of Alberta hosted 65 in-person public
engagement sessions across the province. A second round of sessions began on January 21, 2025;
by March 31, 2025, 54 of the 63 planned sessions had been completed, with the remaining 10 held
in April and May 2025. These two-hour sessions began with a short presentation on the system
refocusing effort, followed by facilitated small-group discussions. Conversations were guided by six
questions exploring strengths in the local health system, existing gaps, collaboration opportunities,
mechanisms for accountability, local decision-making, and supports needed for health workers,
patients, caregivers, and communities.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                       37
Results Analysis



In 2024, a total of 2,850 Albertans attended the sessions, including 192 who participated in the final
10 sessions held in April 2024. Key themes that emerged included the importance of timely access
to care; clear and transparent communication; strong support for the health workforce; the unique
needs of rural, remote, and Indigenous communities; the value of local decision-making; two-way
accountability; and improved coordination across the system.

To maintain ongoing communication, Alberta Health distributed four e-newsletters between
January and March 2025 to over 7,500 subscribers, totalling 27,935 emails. Topics included
announcements and engagement opportunities related to ALA and emergency services.

Indigenous and Francophone Engagement

From April to June 2024, the Government of Alberta conducted 18 Indigenous information
gathering sessions — four in person and 14 virtual. The in-person sessions were hosted in locations
aligned with the Medicine Wheel (north, south, east, and west regions). These sessions were
facilitated with the support of the Indigenous Health Division and guided by seven culturally
informed questions addressing cultural practices, health partnerships, equitable access,
recruitment, accountability, and system improvements.

Feedback from First Nations, Métis, and Inuit participants highlighted significant barriers to
accessing care, limited Indigenous engagement and representation, a lack of culturally safe services,
insufficient health promotion and education, gaps in mental health and addiction supports, limited
continuity in transitions of care, and concerns related to treaty rights and information-sharing
agreements. An Indigenous-specific online feedback form was also available between April 30 and
July 5, 2024.

To ensure French-speaking Albertans had equitable opportunities to participate, Alberta Health, in
collaboration with the Association canadienne-française de l'Alberta, Réseau santé albertain, and
the Francophone Secretariat, hosted two French-language engagement sessions: an in-person
session in Edmonton on June 17, 2024, and a virtual session on June 20, 2024. These were
conducted entirely in French, with all materials provided in French. The sessions reinforced key
public engagement themes and surfaced unique priorities, including improved access to health care
in French, community governance, and language promotion. A French-language online feedback
form was available from June 6 to July 5, 2024.

Online Engagement

In addition to in-person and targeted sessions, Alberta Health provided online feedback tools in
English, French, and Indigenous-specific formats. Two public feedback windows were held:
November 10, 2023, to January 15, 2024, and January 23 to April 21, 2024. Over 18,000 responses
were received from Albertans, with a higher representation of respondents identifying as female
and aged 35 to 54 years compared with the general population. Respondents prioritized issues
related to workforce development, improvements to service delivery, health system structure and
governance, partnerships, integration of technology, and resource allocation. While the French and
Indigenous online forms had smaller sample sizes, the themes mirrored those raised during the in-
person sessions.

Health Workforce Engagement

Alberta Health directly engaged health care providers through public sessions and targeted
communications. Many providers participated in the in-person sessions from January to April 2024
and again between January and April 2025. Workforce feedback was continuously integrated into
system planning.


38                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                            Results Analysis



The Alberta Health Change Management Program played a key role in supporting communications
with staff affected by the transition to new PHAs. This included regular updates, reference
documents, such as frequently asked questions and fact sheets, onboarding resources, and in-
person and virtual engagement opportunities. The program also facilitated ongoing collaboration
between AHS, ACA, and PCA, ensuring alignment and minimizing disruption to service delivery.

Additional engagement activities included seven regional sessions with health foundations between
October 29 and December 11, 2024. These were held both virtually and in person, with 59 of
Alberta’s 70 health foundations participating, which includes an increasing participating rate to 84
per cent. Outreach was also conducted with medical associations, First Nations, Métis and Inuit
health leaders, university researchers, and members of the PCA and ACA medical leadership.
Physician-specific town halls were organized to enable direct dialogue with leadership teams.

Outcomes and Next Steps

The feedback received through these engagement efforts was shared with the Minister of Health,
the Minister of Mental Health and Addiction, and system leaders across the province. Alberta Health
remains committed to demonstrating how this input is being used to guide decisions, develop
policies, and shape the implementation of the refocused health care system. A comprehensive
“What We Heard” report is available through the Lead the Way platform, and future updates will
continue to reflect the voices of Albertans who contribute to this important work.

2.3   Modernize and transform the continuing care system to improve access and shift to
      more care in the community

The Ministry of Health is reporting on progress in palliative and end-of-life care, as well as licensing
and monitoring, to support the transformation of Alberta’s continuing care system and improve access
to community-based services.

Responsibility for the stand-up of the continuing care agency was transferred to the Ministry of
Seniors, Community and Social Services in fall 2024. In 2024-25, the Ministry of Health made
significant strides toward strengthening and modernizing Alberta’s continuing care, primary health
care, and digital health systems. Alberta’s government maintained its commitment to shift care to
community-based settings and expand access to high-quality continuing care services.

Palliative and End-of-Life Care

In Alberta, palliative and end-of-life care is offered in a range of settings including, but not limited
to, acute care hospitals, outpatient clinics, primary care provider settings, continuing care homes
(including type C- hospice), EMS, and home and community care settings.

To address the growing needs among Alberta’s aging population, the Government of Alberta has
prioritized investments that enhance access to palliative and end-of-life care as part of its
continuing care transformation.

These investments are aimed at ensuring Albertans receive compassionate, appropriate, and
dignified care at all stages of life, including end-of-life.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                           39
Results Analysis



Licensing and Monitoring in Continuing Care

To strengthen accountability, transparency, and oversight in Alberta’s continuing care system, the
Government of Alberta introduced a new legislative framework:

      •       On April 1, 2024, the Continuing Care Act and associated regulations—Continuing Care
              Regulation and Continuing Care (Ministerial) Regulation—came into effect. This
              legislative update marked a major milestone in transforming Alberta’s continuing care
              system.
      •       The Act enables Alberta Health to enhance licensing, monitoring, and compliance
              processes across all levels of continuing care, including home and community care,
              supportive living, and palliative services. These enhanced oversight mechanisms are
              intended to ensure quality, safety, and equitable access to services.

Additionally, ALA, expected to become operational by fall 2025, will align medical and non-medical
services, expand access to continuing care, and support system accountability through integrated
service delivery and performance monitoring.

The performance metric 2.b, included in the 2024-27 Business Plan, pertains to Continuing Care
which has been transitioned to the Ministry of Seniors, Community and Social Services. Hence, this
data will not be discussed in this report.

Unplanned medical readmissions to hospital within 30 days of discharge

                                              2020-21       2021-22       2022-23        2023-24       2024-25


 Percentage of patients with an
 unplanned medical re-
                                              13.2%         12.9%         12.6%          12.7%          12.7%
 admission within 30 days of
 discharge

Source: Alberta’s Morbidity and Ambulatory Care Abstract Reporting System (MACAR)
Note: The result is for Acute Care data submissions

The above performance measure estimates the percentage of medical patients with an unplanned
readmission to hospital within 30 days of being discharged. A lower percentage means fewer
patients have been readmitted to hospital within one month of discharge. A high rate of
readmissions increases costs and may mean the health system is not performing as well as it could
be. Although readmission may involve many factors, lower readmission rates may show that
Albertans are supported by discharge planning and continuity of care. Results exclude hospital
admissions for surgery, pregnancy, childbirth, mental health diseases and disorders, palliative care,
and cancer therapy. The desired result is to decrease the percentage of unplanned readmissions to
hospital within 30 days of discharge.

In 2024-25, the percentage of medical patients with an unplanned hospital readmission within 30
days of discharge from hospital was 12.7 per cent, identical to as that of previous years.

2.4       Strengthen and modernize Alberta’s primary health care system in partnership with
          Albertans and Indigenous communities by implementing innovations to ensure access
          to safe, timely and appropriate primary health care services in the community


40                                                                                  Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



A strong primary health care system is foundational for better health care for Albertans. In 2024-
25, the Government of Alberta took significant steps to stabilize and strengthen primary health care
so that every Albertan can access timely and high-quality care when and where they need it.

To advance this goal, Alberta continued implementing recommendations from the MAPS initiative.
These actions support the province’s commitment to building a more patient-centred, integrated,
and equitable health care system.

In response to the MAPS Strategic Advisory Panel and the Indigenous Advisory Panel final reports,
several initiatives were launched in 2024-25:

    •        $57 million over three years was provided to family doctors and NPs to help manage
             rising patient care costs.
    •        A three-year grant of $704,000 in 2024-25 supported Imagine Citizens’ pilot of Care
             Opinion, an online platform for public feedback on health care experiences.
    •        A $400,000 grant supported the continued operation and expansion of the Alberta Find
             a Doctor website, including family physicians and NPs not affiliated with Primary Care
             Networks.
    •        $5 million over two years was invested in the Primary Care Fund to reduce
             administrative burden, improve access to primary care, and enhance team-based care.
These investments are addressing urgent pressures and helping to stabilize Alberta’s primary
health care system.

The Government of Alberta remains committed to improving access to culturally safe and
appropriate care for First Nations, Métis and Inuit peoples. In 2024-25, $27.6 million was allocated
to advance Indigenous health equity through two major grants:

    •        $7.6 million over three years funded the Navigator Program, supporting 18
             organizations (up to $450,000 each) to assist Indigenous patients in navigating the
             health system, reducing barriers, and improving primary care access. The funding aligns
             with Alberta’s new Indigenous Health Division and ongoing efforts to support
             Indigenous-led health care solutions. Following the success of the program, the
             Government of Canada contributed an additional $6.3 million over three years in
             funding through the Bilateral Indigenous Patient Navigator Grant Program.
    •        The $20 million Indigenous Primary Health Care Innovation Fund is expanding
             Indigenous virtual care services through the Alberta Indigenous Virtual Care Clinic
             (AIVCC); increasing Indigenous-led cancer screening programs; supporting health
             promotion and disease prevention; along with funding infrastructure and capital
             projects.
To enhance provider capacity, Alberta Health made key investments in team-based care models:

    •        $30 million over two years was allocated to expand team-based care in four community
             health centres: The Alex, CUPS Calgary Society, Jasper Place Wellness Centre, and Radius
             Community Health & Healing.

Recognizing the critical role of family physicians, the Government of Alberta announced a
modernized physician compensation model on December 19, 2024. This model is designed to
attract, retain, and support family physicians and rural generalists. In addition, $13.8 million was
allocated over two-years to PCA to identify new, and expand and scale existing innovative solutions
that provide comprehensive, team-based, primary care services. The NPPCP also saw significant


Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                     41
Results Analysis



uptake. This program supports NPs to operate independently. Since April 2024, 145 applications
have been submitted, with 65 approved. As of March 31, 2025, 53 NPs are practising autonomously
under the NPPCP, with 63,769 medically necessary services provided to 31,905 Albertans. NPPCP
NPs are primarily practising urban communities, with 20 of the 53 NPs in rural communities such
as Beaverlodge, Cold Lake, Two Hills, and Vermilion.

To further support rural emergency care, Alberta launched a pilot project on November 25, 2024,
introducing virtual emergency physicians in five rural emergency departments (EDs): Edson,
Hinton, Lac La Biche, Elk Point, and Beaverlodge. This program enables remote physicians to assess
patients by video, supported by on-site nurses and paramedics. It helps prevent temporary ED
closures, allowing more patients to receive local care. Patients needing in-person emergency care
will still be transferred by EHS to a nearby hospital.

Performance Indicator 2.a:
     Number of practicing family physicians and registered nurse practitioners in Alberta

                                                                      Prior Years’ Results                          2024
                                                                                                                   Actual1
                                                         2020          2021           2022            2023

 Number of practising family
                                                        5,398          5,388          5,521          5,656          5,951
 physicians (as of Dec 31)

 Number of registered NPs                                 715           819            844            887           1,017

Source: CPSA – https://cpsa.ca/about-cpsa/statistics/
Note: 1 Historical data has been adjusted and restated for prior years to align with the fiscal year reporting periods.

The performance indicator 2.a reflects the number of registered family physicians and NPs in
Alberta. Having an adequate supply of physicians and nurse practitioners would ensure that
Alberta's health care system is always responsive to Albertans' health needs. The number of
registered family physicians and nurse practitioners reflects the system’s capacity to provide
timely, accessible, and community-based care across Alberta.

The number of registered family physicians in Alberta continues to grow annually. More family
physicians and NPs are now registered to practice in Alberta compared with previous years. As of
December 31, 2024, there were 5,951 family physicians and 1,017 NPs registered in Alberta, which
was a net gain of 295 physicians (5.2 per cent increase) and 130 NPs (14.7 per cent increase),
respectively, compared with the same period last year. Expanding the family physician and
registered nurse workforce will improve the efficiency and quality of primary health care delivery
across the province.

2.5    Strengthen the health care system for Albertans and health care providers through the
       use and integration of information technology

The Government of Alberta is actively improving the digital health environment to provide
Albertans with access to their health information and to give health care providers more complete
digital patient information at the point of care. These efforts enhance care quality and support
informed decision-making. Considerable investments are being made to modernize Alberta’s digital
health infrastructure.




42                                                                                           Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



As of November 2024, Connect Care was fully implemented across AHS and affiliated facilities. It
currently supports 125,000 staff, physicians, and clinicians across AHS, affiliated facilities, and
provincial health agencies that currently operate. Significant progress was also made in advancing
the following digital tools for both patients and providers:

    •        As of March 31, 2025, MyHealth Records (MHR), a portal that allows Albertans to access
             their health information, surpassed 1.9 million registrants.
    •        Over 2,100 community clinics and 1,700 pharmacies were connected to Alberta Netcare,
             Alberta’s Electronic Health Record system, improving provider access to patient
             information.
    •        Alberta Netcare enhancements included the Patient Quick View dashboard, Patient
             Summary Report, and docking capabilities, improving usability for more than 45,000
             clinicians.
    •        The Community Information Integration (CII) and Central Patient Attachment Registry
             (CPAR) continued to expand. Over 2.7 million patients were paneled in CPAR and over
             28.6 million Clinical Encounter Digests were shared through CII.
    •        The Electronic Referral Solution completed several key software upgrades in Phase 2.
             The system is progressing through a closed-loop provincial eReferral model, which
             remains the objective in the next reporting period.
    •        The ministry completed stakeholder consultations and developed a roadmap for an
             Electronic Medical Records (EMR) Certification Program. The initial $500,000 phase
             was completed on December 15, 2024. This program will strengthen system
             interoperability and patient data integration across Alberta.

The ministry completed a proof of concept of AI-driven automated rules extraction and analysis. A
detailed roadmap was developed for modernizing the eligibility and premiums (EAP) legacy
system. Future modernization work includes implementing the EAP roadmap and further
replacement of legacy mainframe systems used in the Canadian public health benefits management
and claims processing domain.

Data integration through the provincial Health Information Exchange was strengthened. New
clinical data sources were added to Alberta Netcare, including diagnostic imaging and reports,
cardiology, pulmonary function tests, laboratory results, community encounter records, and clinic
consultation reports. These additions support more comprehensive and coordinated patient care.

In 2024–25, the Government of Alberta initiated a phased implementation of Lab eOrdering. This
will introduce a closed-loop electronic ordering solution to enhance the efficiency and accuracy of
laboratory test requisitions. The first phase developed a minimum viable product, creating a
foundation for a fully integrated electronic laboratory ordering system.

An independent review of Alberta’s IT systems was completed in summer 2024. A new Digital
Health Operating Model that aligns with a refocused health system is currently in development
based on findings from the independent review.

Alberta Health is also in the process of standing up a Shared Services Entity (SSE) that consolidates
Alberta's digital health IT and supports the new Digital Health Operating Model. The SSE
consolidates digital health IT resourcing to provide services across the new Provincial Health
Agencies and Health Service Delivery Organizations of the Refocused Health System. The SSE is
slated to become operational in September 2025.

Alberta Health, collaboratively with PCA, is working on an initiative to enhance Alberta Netcare
with access to Connect Care for mixed context community providers. A targeted rollout to a select



Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                      43
Results Analysis



group of community providers (determined in partnership with the AMA) is underway and
scheduled to complete by fall 2025.



Performance Indicator 2.c:
     Number of Albertan registered for MyHealth Records

                                                                                          2024-25
                                2020-21      2021-22       2022-23        2023-24
                                                                                           Actual

  Number of Albertans
  registered for               539,800      1,259,500     1,486,300     1,728,500       1,993,500
  MyHealth Records

Source: Alberta Health

As of March 31, 2025, approximately 1.99 million Albertans were registered for MHRs, an increase
from around 1.73 million users at the end of March 2024. This growth reflects a steady rise in
registrations over recent years. This upward trend indicates a growing adoption of digital health
tools among Albertans.

2.6   Implement strategies that ensure the sustainability of publicly funded pharmaceutical
      benefits

The Government of Alberta remains committed to addressing gaps in drug coverage while ensuring
that drug benefits programs are sustainable and meet the needs of Albertans. Prescription drugs
help manage illnesses, improve quality of life, and, in some cases, preclude the need for more
extensive treatments. The province continued to focus on ensuring value for money spent on these
benefits through improving existing drug benefit programs and adding innovative, effective
therapies.

In December 2024, Alberta signed a bilateral agreement with the federal government to receive
approximately $54 million annually over three years. This funding supports access to new and
emerging drugs for rare diseases and expands screening and diagnostics, improving health
outcomes for Albertans. This funding will provide Albertans with earlier access to a common set of
rare disease drugs, and additional funding for rare disease drugs that are currently offered in
Alberta.

The first new drugs funded under the agreement include Poteligeo for Sézary syndrome, Oxlumo
for hyperoxaluria type 1, and Epkinly for large B-cell lymphoma treatments. It is expected that
approximately 30 Albertans will be eligible annually for these new treatments. Additional drugs
added include Koselugo for neurofibromatosis type 1, Yescarta for follicular lymphoma, and
Welireg for Von Hippel-Lindau disease.

The Government of Alberta also reviewed the federal government’s An Act Respecting Pharmacare
(National Pharmacare Act), which received royal assent on October 10, 2024. The Minister of Health
notified the federal government that Alberta will monitor developments and outcomes of the
federal government’s discussions with other provinces and territories on the National Pharmacare
Act. Alberta requested their fair share of federal funding - without conditions - to strengthen its
existing pharmacare programs and expand coverage.



44                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis



In 2024, Alberta Health worked with the Alberta Pharmacists’ Association (RxA) and identified that
pharmacy expenditures were projected to exceed the 2024-25 budgeted threshold. To address this,
cost‑saving measures were introduced on November 1, 2024:

    •        The initial assessment fee for a Comprehensive Annual Care Plan (CACP) was reduced to
             $70 from $100.
    •        The maximum allowed annual follow-up visits for the CACP and Standard Medication
             Management Assessment care plans were reduced from 12 to 4.


These changes align with practices in other jurisdictions and actual service use in Alberta. While
pharmacy fees for some clinical pharmacy services, specifically care plans offered by pharmacists to
Albertans, were adjusted, Albertans continue to have access to assessments and necessary follow-
ups. Core pharmacy services – including dispensing, injections, prescribing, and prescription
renewals - were not affected.

The policy changes on November 1, 2024, have resulted in approximately $19 million in cost-offsets
for 2024-25. Although fee changes provided some financial relief, ongoing expenditures are still
exceeding budget projections due to additional pressures such as increased demand for pharmacy
services and population growth. Alberta Health will continue consultations with the RxA into 2025,
aiming to identify further sustainability measures and develop a new pharmacy framework for
2026 onwards.

The Government of Alberta continued its efforts to reduce prescription drug costs and expanded
access to life-saving drugs. On November 5, 2024, Alberta expanded access to Trikafta to include
individuals with rare mutations of cystic fibrosis who could benefit from treatment. An estimated
70 additional patients will now be able to access this therapy.

In January 2024, COVID-19 vaccine fees were reduced from $25 per dose to $17 per dose. This was
further reduced to $13 per dose on April 1, 2024. This aligns with the fee for administration of
other publicly funded vaccines. The fee for COVID assessment was removed in October 2023.

Access to additional vaccines was expanded. The publicly funded list now includes tetanus,
diphtheria and acellular pertussis (TDaP) and pneumococcal and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
vaccines. To support outreach programs, the administration fee for pharmacists delivering vaccines
to vulnerable populations in outreach facilities was increased from $13 to $17 as part of the Alberta
Immunization Outreach Program.

Alberta also advanced its biosimilars initiative with the addition of two categories: Ustekinumab
and Denosumab. These additions are expected to save $10 million annually. Alberta also benefited
from national negotiations through the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA). In 2023-24,
public drug programs saved an estimated $4.63 billion, with cumulative savings over $24 billion
since inception in 2010. Alberta’s portion of these savings is estimated to be $463 million in 2023-
2024 and $2.4 billion since 2010 based on our portion of public drug spending.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                    45
Results Analysis



Outcome Three: The health and well-being of all Albertans is protected, supported and
improved, and health inequities among underserved populations, including Indigenous
Peoples, are reduced
The ministry continues to work with its partners to address health inequities for underserved
populations, empower patients, promote health and wellness and give Albertans choice when
receiving care from health care professionals.

Key Objectives
3.1       Safeguard Albertans from communicable diseases, such as food-borne illnesses,
          vaccine preventable diseases (e.g., measles, influenza), respiratory illnesses, and
          sexually transmitted and blood borne infections that can cause severe health
          outcomes through prevention and health promotion measures and policies.

Alberta Health remains committed to safeguarding the health and well-being of Albertans through
proactive measures to prevent the spread of several communicable diseases, such as influenza,
measles, and sexually transmitted and blood borne infections (STBBIs). Immunization programs
remain one of the core public health functions that continues to be a key strategy in preventing
disease and reducing strain on the acute care system.

In 2024-25, Alberta allocated approximately $148 million to support the continued delivery of
provincially funded vaccines, including routine infant, preschool, and school programs. DTaP-IPV-
Hib dose four immunization coverage rates by children aged two decreased from 71 per cent in
2023 to 69 per cent in 2024. Measles, mumps, rubella immunization coverage rates by age two
decreased from 82 per cent in 2023 to 80 per cent in 2024. These immunization rates are both
lower than the national target of 95 per cent for these vaccines (table below).

Childhood immunization rates in Alberta have continued to decline over the last five years, which
led to an increase in vaccine-preventable disease cases and outbreaks (e.g., ongoing pertussis
circulation and newly identified measles cases across the province). To improve these rates, AHS
implemented targeted initiatives to address vaccine hesitancy. For example, AHS is recalling
children for overdue immunizations, monitoring wait times, and developing a provincial
appointment standard to address delays. The AHS Immunization Priority Working Group advanced
its five-year workplan, including the development of:

      •      Provincial immunization orientation modules, including a vaccine hesitancy module to
             assist immunizers in conversations with vaccine hesitant individuals

      •      Immunization resources in multiple languages




46                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                 Results Analysis



Children by age two immunized for diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis (whooping cough), polio,
Haemophilus influenza type b) (DTaP-IPV-Hib) and for measles, mumps, rubella (MMR)

                                                               2020       2021      2022      2023      2024

  Children by age two immunized with four doses of
  diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis (whooping cough),
                                                                76%       73%       71%        71%       69%
  polio, Haemophilus influenza type b) (DTaP-IPV-
  Hib) vaccine

  Children by age two immunized with one
                                                                87%       83%       82%       82%        80%
  dose of MMR vaccine

Source: AHCIP Quarterly Population Registries and Immunization/Adverse Reactions to Immunization (Imm/ARI)

This performance measure reports the percentage of children in Alberta who, by two years of age,
have received the required immunization for the following vaccine preventable diseases:
diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis (whooping cough), Haemophilus influenza type b, measles, mumps
and rubella. A high rate of immunization reduces the incidence of these diseases and serves to
control outbreaks.

Measles cases have surged globally since 2024, partly due to reduced vaccinations during the
COVID-19 pandemic. In response to outbreaks, including one in Canada, Alberta Health is updating
guidelines and developing a response plan with partners, including AHS, Indigenous Services
Canada, and Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), including PHAC’s measles case and contact
management guidance document. Two cases of travel-acquired measles were reported in Alberta in
2024. As of March 31, 2025, 23 confirmed measles cases were reported, with most of the confirmed
cases being in unimmunized individuals. Measles activity is across multiple AHS zones, with two
cases linked to a multi-jurisdictional outbreak. The source cases in each zone were primarily travel-
acquired.

A pertussis outbreak was declared in January 2023 in the South Zone and outbreaks were
subsequently reported across all zones in the province. A Provincial Pertussis Coordinating
Committee (PPCC) was convened in August 2023 to May 2024 to respond to the increase in
reported pertussis cases to limit further spread. The PPCC included representatives from Alberta
Health, AHS, Indigenous Services Canada, and the Alberta Provincial Laboratory. The last associated
zone pertussis outbreak was closed in July 2024.

The provincial incidence rate for pertussis increased from 0.3 (2022) to 19.1 (2023) per 100,000
population, then declined to 12.3 (2024) per 100,000 population. Between January 1, 2023, and
March 31, 2025, a total of 1,608 cases were reported across all zones, and most cases (52.1 per
cent) involved under-immunized or unimmunized children under age 10. During this time, one
pertussis-related death was reported in 2024.

On November 27, 2024, Alberta Health released its One Health Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR)
Framework for Action, backed by $5 million in funding and a public web page to promote
stakeholder engagement. Alberta Health is now implementing the AMR Framework using a phased
approach in collaboration with Agriculture and Irrigation and Environment and Protected Areas.
Funding will support antimicrobial stewardship in primary, acute, and veterinary care.

The Edmonton Zone shigella outbreak was declared over in March 2025. Alberta Health continued
to participate on the Shigella Outbreak Task Force, alongside AHS, shelters, inner-city agencies, the



Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                               47
Results Analysis



City of Edmonton, local family physicians, and APL, to coordinate resources and discuss options to
limit the spread of shigella. Since the start of the outbreak, there were 448 cases identified, with
309 hospitalizations.

The PHAC, in collaboration with provincial and territorial partners, has incorporated culture-
independent diagnostic tests (CIDTs) into case definitions for some enteric diseases as part of
routine surveillance and reporting. CIDTs rapidly detect organisms such as shigellosis and Shiga
toxin-producing E. coli for timely case and contact management. Alberta Health and APL helped
develop these updated national case definitions that were published by the Government of Canada
in January 2024. The work is being continued with the federal government to review and
implement the updated case definitions, while also updating the provincial enteric case definitions
and disease management guidelines.

Alberta has experienced a rapid increase in rates of STBBIs over the last decade like several
jurisdictions in Canada and around the world. In 2022, rates reached an all-time high for the
current syphilis outbreak in Alberta, where 73.5 infectious syphilis cases (per 100,000 population)
and 174.4 congenital syphilis cases (per 100,000 live births) were reported. Since then, rates have
been decreasing but remain high overall.

Performance Indicator 3.a:
     Rate of infectious syphilis per 100,000 population and the rate of congenital syphilis
     per 100,000 live births in Alberta

                                                  2020           2021           2022            2023           2024

  Infectious syphilis (per 100,000
                                                   57.2           73.3           73.5            58.0           43.9
  population)

  Congenital syphilis (per
                                                  116.8          153.7          174.4           121.6           98.4
  100,000 live births)

Source: Communicable Disease & Outbreak Management (CDOM) - Communicable Disease Reporting System (CDRS),
AHCIP Adjusted Mid-Year Population Registry Files, Alberta Health Postal Code Translator File (PCTF), and Vital Statistics
Live Births

In 2024, there were 43.9 infectious syphilis cases (per 100,00 population) and 98.4 congenital
syphilis cases (per 100,000 live births) reported. The goal in Alberta is to have zero congenital
syphilis cases. Despite these decreases, Alberta’s current rates of human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV), chlamydia, and gonorrhea have increased by 66.2 per cent, 0.8 per cent, and 4.7 per cent
respectively compared with 2022, highlighting the continued need for public health vigilance and
intervention.

The decrease in infectious syphilis rates reflects a multi-pronged approach to effectively address
the outbreak including:

     •        Syphilis point-of-care testing
     •        Dedicated resources for partner notification, contact tracing, and outreach teams
     •        Targeted education, testing and treatment programs

Despite an improvement from the previous year, the rates of syphilis and congenital syphilis are
still too high and continue to represent a significant public health concern for Alberta.



48                                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



From April 1, 2024, to September 30, 2024, organizations providing STBBI prevention and wrap-
around supports administered over 13,000 STBBI tests and provided treatment to over 468
individuals for a sexually transmitted infection. These organizations provided intensive support to
over 459 people living with an STBBI, including assistance with service navigation and delivered
over 100 education sessions to health care professionals and service providers across Alberta.

AHS continues to work on initiatives to increase syphilis awareness, which include a provincial
webinar for primary care providers: Current State of Syphilis: The Critical Role of Primary Care.
Alberta Health continues to participate in the Syphilis Response Committees at the provincial and
federal levels to address the ongoing syphilis outbreak. A total of $3.2 million is provided annually
for syphilis specific projects, including $2 million provided to eight organizations for Syphilis
Outbreak Action Response (SOAR). In 2024-2025 the SOAR projects:

      •      Held over 60 syphilis awareness events, reaching over 3,500 individuals
      •      Administered over 3,000 STBBI tests
      •      Provided syphilis treatments to over 120 people
      •      Developed education materials, including accredited training and Indigenous-specific
             resources

The Alberta Outreach Program started the week of September 30, 2024, to immunize those at
highest risk of severe outcomes from influenza and COVID-19. The program focuses on providing
immunization services to those at highest risk of severe outcomes, hospitalization, and death due to
vaccine preventable diseases, such as, influenza and COVID-19, as well as invasive pneumococcal
disease, and RSV.

The 2024-25 Influenza and COVID-19 Immunization Programs for the general public began on
October 15, 2024.

As of March 31, 2025:

      •      21 per cent of all Albertans had received the influenza vaccine
      •      Highest uptake: 61 per cent in those 75 and older
      •      13.7 per cent had received a COVID-19 vaccine
      •      Highest uptake: 54.4 per cent in those 75 and older

Albertans accessed these vaccines at more than 1,700 sites across the province, supported by the
Alberta Vaccine Booking System.

3.2       Modernize and strengthen public health legislation to better respond to future public
          health emergencies.

The Government of Alberta remains committed to supporting all Albertans by continuing to
respond promptly, flexibly, and collaboratively to future public health emergencies across all areas
of government. In 2024-25, Alberta Health has focused on strengthening the Alberta workforce and
relationships with the AMA to achieve this goal.

Alberta Health provided $24 million to the AMA to administer a Panel Management Support
Program (PMSP) to help offset costs of maintaining and growing a panel of patients. The PMSP is a
three-year initiative designed to increase access for Albertans to insured medical services.

Alberta Health provided $92 million to the AMA to administer a Transitional Funding Program to
provide physicians with financial support for the cost of eligible expenses related to panel



Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                     49
Results Analysis



management and practice improvement activities. This grant funding was designed to increase
access for Albertans to insured medical services.

Alberta Health collaborated with the AMA to develop a new PCPCM to compensate Alberta’s family
medicine and rural generalist physicians. The PCPCM was implemented on April 1, 2025, and
reaffirms Alberta’s family doctors as among the best compensated and most patient‑focused in the
country. The model is structured to:

      •      Encourage physicians to grow the number of patients they care for
      •      Promote encouragement of full‑time practice
      •      Provide incentives to physicians maintaining high panel numbers, after‑hours care, use
             of improved technology to enhance patient care, and team‑based care

These efforts aim to strengthen Alberta’s primary care system and help reduce pressure on other
parts of the health care system.

3.3       Improve access for underserved populations including First Nations, Métis, and Inuit
          Peoples to high-quality and culturally safe health care services that support
          improved health outcomes.

The Government of Alberta continues to prioritize the health care needs of First Nations, Métis, and
Inuit peoples residing in Alberta. Alberta Health works with health and community partners
including First Nations and Métis leaders and the Government of Canada to ensure that health
services are accessible and culturally appropriate. This commitment entails working with
Indigenous leaders, the Government of Canada, and other partners in a way that respects the
unique and complex needs of these communities. Part of this commitment includes several
initiatives underway to improve health outcomes.

The Indigenous Primary Health Care Implementation Panel developed implementation strategies,
including an implementation road map for the 22 recommendations outlined in the March 31, 2023,
final report to the former Minister of Health on improving the primary health care system for First
Nations, Métis, and Inuit patients in Alberta. On April 19, 2024, The Way Forward document was
publicly released, including the panel’s implementation roadmap, which outlines the sequencing
and timelines for implementing the recommendations. To date, Indigenous MAPS continues to
make progress on the recommendations. The Way Forward is a living document to be updated over
time as implementation moves forward and the provincial health system evolves.

Although the Indigenous Primary Health Care Implementation Panel’s mandate formally concluded
on December 31, 2024, The Way Forward document continues to ensure a more inclusive, culturally
safe health care system for First Nations, Métis, and Inuit communities in Alberta. Ongoing updates
to the document will help improve health outcomes with the design of new health care policies and
programs informed by direct input from these communities, leading to more culturally appropriate,
accessible, and effective care.

Administered by Alberta Health under the Indigenous MAPS stream, the Indigenous Primary Health
Care Innovation Fund (Innovation Fund) aims to enhance access to culturally safe and accessible
primary health care for First Nations, Métis, and Inuit peoples. The Innovation Fund improves
health outcomes by fostering better engagement, increased adherence to treatment, reduced health
disparities, and ensuring that care respects cultural needs and knowledge.

The Innovation Fund offers two funding streams: Tier One provides up to $2 million for community
capacity-building and testing promising practices, while Tier Two offers up to $3 million to scale or
expand Indigenous-led programs, initiatives, and infrastructure. In the first round, two grant


50                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Results Analysis



recipients were selected to receive funding: the First Nations Technical Services Advisory Group
Inc., expanding the AIVCC, and the Métis Nation of Alberta, enhancing their Medical Travel Program
to improve health access for Métis peoples. The third and final round of the Innovation Fund closed
on November 15, 2024.

The Innovation Fund was awarded to the First Nations Technical Services Advisory Group Inc. This
grant will support the existing core clinic and mental health teams hire staff and develop resources
to better meet growing demands and expand cancer screening. The fund helps to improve access to
primary and mental health care for First Nations, Métis, and Inuit individuals, especially in remote
or underserved areas. Expanding cancer screening programs and increasing mental health support
will help with early detection, prevention, and better management of health conditions, ultimately
leading to improved overall health for these communities.

The Indigenous Patient Navigator Program provides financial support to recruit and retain
navigators who assist First Nations, Métis, and Inuit patients, communities, and organizations in
accessing primary health care services. The $7.6 million over three years provided by the program
improves care coordination, reduces barriers, and enhances health outcomes by ensuring
personalized support, timely access to health care services, and better management of diseases or
health conditions. Following the success of this program, the Government of Canada contributed an
additional $4 million to launch a second call of navigator program funding through the Bilateral
Indigenous Patient Navigator Grant Program.

Alberta Health approved the Indigenous Anti-Racism in Health Care Strategy to address perceived
racism in Alberta’s health care system. To help shape the strategy, the Indigenous Health Division
hosted 28 virtual sessions and 11 in-person sessions, in addition to an online feedback form in fall
2024. The sessions aimed to hear the lived experiences and perspectives of First Nations, Métis, and
Inuit peoples, and health system partners. The anti-racism information gathering sessions fostered
collaboration between these communities, health care providers, and key organizations to create a
more culturally sensitive and inclusive health care system. The feedback gathered will help shape
the Anti-Racism in Health Care Strategy, ensuring it addresses the specific needs and concerns of
communities, ultimately improving health care delivery and trust. The anti-racism information
gathering sessions will help contribute to improved health outcomes by ensuring that the action
plan is tailored to the unique needs of these communities, promoting a health care system that is
more culturally sensitive and responsive. The ministry continues to uphold its commitment to
Jordan’s Principle by ensuring First Nations children receive timely access to publicly funded
health, education, and social services without denials, delays, or disruptions due to jurisdictional
issues tied to their First Nations status.

In early January 2025, the Minister of Health met with Health Canada, ISC, and representatives from
various Indigenous communities in Edmonton, including the Métis Nation of Alberta, Metis
Settlements General Council, Treaty 6 and Treaty 8 First Nations, the Blackfoot Confederacy, and
the Stoney Nakoda Tsuut’ina Tribal Council. These meetings are crucial for addressing key
priorities and concerns of communities. The discussions aimed to improve access to essential
health services and ensure that policies better meet the unique needs of First Nation, Métis, and
Inuit communities.

3.4      Prevent injuries and manage chronic diseases and conditions through policy
         development, health and wellness promotion, improved access to screening, and
         initiatives that facilitate wellbeing in healthy environments.

The Government of Alberta is leading policies and initiatives to improve the well-being of
Albertans. In 2024-25, this included areas such as maternal, infant and early childhood
development; injury prevention; and the advancement of population wellness and health equity.


Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                   51
Results Analysis



Alberta Health and AHS continue to prioritize access to reproductive health and maternity services
for Indigenous, vulnerable, and rural populations. Budget 2024 provided over $2 million in annual
funding to help vulnerable mothers and their babies access prenatal and postnatal care and social
supports. Alberta Health has also committed $20 million in funding to the Alberta Women’s Health
Foundation and the Calgary Health Foundation to support research on women’s health matters. The
funding for both foundations will support the implementation and evaluation of clinical programs
including a rapid access clinic as well as support research of women’s health conditions.

In 2024-25, the government focused on ensuring safe and reliable drinking water for Albertans by
working with national groups and Environment and Protected Areas to implement the Canadian
Drinking Water guidelines. The Alberta government also supported and funded a provincial
educational program and provided water testing for well water users, helping them manage their
water resources safely and effectively.

Under the Alberta Safe Beach protocol, a prioritized list of recreational water sites were analyzed
for water quality in support of healthy environments and prevention of waterborne illness. This
contributes to the Ministry's objective to promote health and wellness and prevent chronic disease
through initiatives that facilitate wellbeing in safe environments. An estimated 488 cyanobacterial
bloom toxicity (microcytin) tests, 2,403 Enterococcus (fecal indicator) tests, and 1,070 speciation of
fecal source (i.e. human vs ruminant) tests were completed. Informed by these results, 23 fecal
contamination and 38 cyanobacteries advisories were issued to safeguard public health and
prevent waterborne illnesses. A Waterborne Pathogen Monitoring Grant was used to investigate
new recreational water testing methods and has concluded as of March 31, 2025.

The Lifesaving Society's Alberta Safe Beach Drowning Reduction Project targeted waterfront
operators and the public, focusing on standardized water safety signage, public education, and
promoting safe aquatic environments. The project focused on 15 provincially identified high-risk
locations to enhance aquatic safety for Albertans. The project has concluded and came in
underbudget with an approximate total cost of $25,300 (against approximately $28,200).

Alberta Health facilitated the management of chronic diseases and promotion of health and
wellness through the administration of grants that contribute to building healthier communities
across the province. These grants supported community-based programs focused on healthy eating,
active living, physical literacy, recreational programming, mental wellness, and social connection
while also empowering health care providers to prescribe physical activity. Alberta Health provided
$960,000 in funding to promote physical activity, healthy eating, and active living for the
management of chronic disease and promotion of health and wellness. It also provided the Injury
Prevention Centre $800,000 per year for three years through programs and campaigns that reduce
the burden of injuries on individuals and the health care system, enhancing the system’s capacity to
respond to other needs.

Government continues to support cancer screening programs to return screening rates to pre-
pandemic levels. Screening programs continue to be supported, such as the Alberta Lung Cancer
screening pilot project, the Colorectal Cancer Screening Program, and the Breast Cancer Screening
program, which support the early detection and treatment of cancer. The Alberta Newborn
Screening Program continues to be supported. The program screens infants for conditions that can
be treated early, when treatment can benefit the most, with the primary goal of reducing morbidity
and mortality among infants born in Alberta.

In response to the September 4, 2023, E. coli outbreak in 11 licensed childcare facilities in Calgary,
the Government of Alberta appointed the Food Safety and Licensed Facility-Based Child Care
Review Panel. The panel identified opportunities for strengthening the legislation and inspection
processes that govern food safety in kitchens for licensed childcare facilities. In June 2024, the


52                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                     Results Analysis



review panel submitted its final report of 12 main recommendations and 27 sub-recommendations.
Implementation of the review panel’s recommendations began in July 2024. The impacts of this
work include extensive review and anticipated changes to ensure food safety is practiced and
enforced in licensed childcare facilities in our province. This will ensure that children and
vulnerable Albertans will experience improved safety when they are served food. Although the
review panel started its review in November 2023, the expenditures on this initiative were applied
in the 2024-2025 budget. Close to $144,000 paid for activities related to the review panel’s
operations, including about $59,000 in honoraria, $3,200 in travel expenses, $50,000 in consulting
fees to conduct engagement with families, and about $21,600 for an independent investigation on
the response and outcomes of the outbreak.

The Government of Alberta is committed to improving access to medical technology that helps
Albertans better manage their health. On December 16, 2024, Alberta Health expanded access to
continuous glucose monitors to Albertans over the age of 18 enrolled in an Alberta government
sponsored supplementary benefit program, who are living with diabetes and require certain insulin
therapies. This fulfils a key recommendation from the Diabetes Working Group, which provided
advice to government on improving Alberta’s diabetes care pathway. Approximately 23,500
Albertans aged 18 years and older will now be eligible for continuous glucose monitor coverage.
Funding for the first two years of this initiative is provided through the Canada-Alberta agreement
to improve health care.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                  53
Results Analysis




Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology
Performance Measure 1.a:
     Emergency department wait times: 90th percentile time to initial physician assessment
     in the 16 largest sites (hours)

Methodology

This measure represents the length of time (in hours) between patient triage and the time of the
initial physician assessment.

The 90th percentile response interval is calculated for all EMS events triaged by the EMS
Communications Centre as ‘delta’ or ‘echo’, the most emergent or potentially life-threatening calls.

Source

AHS – Emergency Department Information Systems and Emergency Department Visit Data
Repository AHS.

Performance Measure 1.b:
EMS 90th percentile response times (minutes) for the most urgent (life threatening) calls

Methodology

Response time is calculated based on events triaged in the EMS Communication Centre, using an
internationally accredited EMS call taking system, to be emergency or potentially life threatening at
the time of triage by the EMS Communications Centre. This includes events categorized as ‘delta’ and
‘echo.’

     •       Inclusion: Event level response interval for all requests for EMS response triaged as a
             ‘delta’ or ‘echo’ by geographical location of call (Metro/Urban, Communities > 3,000,
             Rural or Remote).

     •       Exclusions:

             o     Events triaged by the EMS Communications Centre as an alpha, bravo or charlie
                   response.
             o     Events or requests identified as inter-facility transfers.
             o     Events with missing timestamps (such as arrive on scene) related to metric
                   calculation.
The 90th percentile response interval is calculated for all EMS events triaged by the EMS
Communications Centre as ‘delta’ or ‘echo’, the most emergent or potentially life-threatening calls.

Source

EMS Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD) data captured with EMS Communications Centres, Alberta
Health




54                                                                              Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 2.a:
     Number of practising family physicians and registered nurse practitioners in Alberta

Methodology

Family physician counts are as of December 31 of each year as reported in the Q4 Quarterly Updates
by the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Alberta (CPSA). CPSA’s year end is December 31, and it
reports the number of physicians every quarter – as of March 31, June 30, September 30, and
December 31.

Note that physician registration counts are cyclical throughout the year. Counts decrease in the first
quarter of the calendar year between January – March, as physicians who do not renew their
registration as of December of the previous year are removed. Numbers increase throughout the
year, particularly in the third quarter between July – September when the majority of new physicians
register after completing residency programs. To reflect the count as at fiscal year end, the registered
family physician numbers have been updated using CPSA data as of March 31, 2025.

Source

College of Physicians and Surgeons of Alberta – https://cpsa.ca/about-cpsa/statistics/



Performance Indicator 2.c:
     Number of Albertans registered for MyHealth Records

Methodology

Number of Albertans who have registered for a MyHealth Records Accounts at the end of each day at
2359EST.

Source

Alberta Health



Performance Indicator 3.a:
     Rate of infectious syphilis per 100,000 population and the rate of congenital syphilis
     per 100,000 live births in Alberta

Methodology

The infectious syphilis rates are calculated by dividing the number of cases (i.e. numerator) by the
number of persons (i.e. denominator). All rates are based on Alberta mid-year population for the
appropriate year and reported per 100,000 population.

The numerator is the number of congenital syphilis cases, derived from the Communicable Disease
& Outbreak Management (CDOM) database for each calendar year. Confirmed and probable cases
are grouped together. Early congenital syphilis cases and syphilitic stillbirths are provided whilst



Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                     55
Results Analysis



late congenital syphilis cases are excluded. STI information, with links to case definitions, are
available online: https://www.alberta.ca/notifiable-diseaseguidelines. Non-Alberta residents are
not included in the numerator. Whenever possible, disease diagnosis dates were used to determine
the year of infection. If the diagnosis date was not available, then the collection date was used. The
denominator is the number of live births in Alberta. The congenital syphilis rate is reported as the
number of congenital syphilis cases diagnosed in Alberta per 100,000 live births.

Source

Communicable Disease & Outbreak Management (CDOM) - Communicable Disease Reporting
System (CDRS), AHCIP Adjusted Mid-Year Population Registry Files, Alberta Health Postal Code
Translator File (PCTF), and Vital Statistics Live Births



Additional Performance Metrics not included in Health Business Plan 2024-27

Performance Indicator (Outcome 1, Key Objective 1.1):
     Percentage of surgical procedures that met national wait time benchmarks

Methodology

Ready-to-treat (RTT) wait time (in days) is calculated for each relevant record meeting specified
inclusion/exclusion criteria.

     •        Inclusion Criteria: All elective hip, knee replacement and cataract surgeries based on
              surgery procedure catalogue descriptions. All urgency levels.
     •        Exclusion Criteria: persons who received emergency surgical care. Cases with an invalid
              RTT date. When cataract surgery is required for both of a patient’s eyes, only the wait
              time for surgery on the first eye is included in the wait time calculations.

RTT Date = The date that the surgeon determines the patient is ready for the surgical intervention.
The RTT Date excludes patient delays or voluntary waits.

Treatment Date = The date the treatment (surgical procedure) took place.

RTT Wait time = Treatment (surgical procedure) Date minus RTT Date

National RTT wait time benchmarks:

     •        Hip replacement national benchmark is 182 days
     •        Knee replacement national benchmark is 182 days
     •        Cataract surgery national benchmark (for first eye) is 112 days.

             Number of cases completed with a RTT wait time less than or equal to the
Percentage = national RTT wait time benchmark                                                     X 100

                   Number of completed cases with valid RTT dates


56                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



Source

Local Operating Room (OR) Information Systems, AHS, and OR Data Repository, AHS



Performance Indicator (Outcome 1, Key Objective 1.1):
     Percentage of scheduled surgeries performed in CSFs

Methodology

Main operating room activity is used as representative of “surgeries” in the province. Based on
identified main operating cases, those which are non-emergency are identified and the percentage
where the site of delivery was a CSF is reported.

     •        Numerator: Non-Emergency MAIN OR cases completed in a CSF.
     •        Denominator: Non-Emergency MAIN OR cases.

                      Number of surgeries performed in CSFs under contract with AHS
Percentage =                                                                            X 100
                      Total number of surgeries in CSFs and hospitals from April 1 to
                      Mar 31
Source

Main Operating Room (OR) Information Systems, OR Data Repository, AHS



Performance Indicator (Outcome 1, Key Objective 1.1):
     Annual number of surgeries provided

Methodology

Annual number of surgeries provided =         Annual Count

                                                 Volume

Source

Local Operating Room (OR) Information Systems, AHS, and OR Data Repository, AHS.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                     57
Results Analysis



Performance Indicator (Outcome 1, Key Objective 1.1):
     Percentage of patients seen within established targets for CT scan and MRI scan

Methodology

Data reflects performance as of the last day of the fiscal year (March 31, 2025).

Target Met Percentage includes all patient types: outpatients, emergency, and inpatients.

Target: Refers to the maximum allowable wait time (in days or hours) for an imaging exam, as
defined by provincial benchmarks. Targets vary by imaging modality, clinical priority, and patient
category.

Source

Path to Care DI Dashboard - OWL Production (1.0): Path to Care DI Access Owl - AHS Tableau Server



Performance Indicator (Outcome 2, Key Objective 2.3):
     Unplanned medical readmissions to hospital within 30 days of discharge

Methodology

Numerator: Total number of medical patients with unplanned readmission to hospital within 30
days of discharge.

     •        Inclusion Criteria: Residents of Alberta covered by the Alberta Health Care Insurance
              Plan. Admission day of subsequent readmission is less than or equal to 30 days of initial
              discharge date from an acute care hospital.
     •        Exclusion Criteria: Transfers (admitted within 6 hours of discharge from another
              hospital, or 6-12 hours after transfer from or to an acute care facility); newborn, still
              birth, cadaver admissions; non-acute care admissions; pediatric (less than 20 years of
              age), surgery, obstetrics, palliative care, mental health admissions; hospital admissions
              for cancer therapy; non-urgent, planned admissions.
Denominator: Total number of medical patients discharged.

     •        Inclusion Criteria: Residents of Alberta covered by the Alberta Health Care Insurance
              Plan; discharge from an acute care hospital, within a reporting period.
     •        Exclusion Criteria: Admissions where patients died in hospital; admissions from March 2
              to March 31; transfers (admitted within 6 hours of discharge from another hospital, or 6-
              12 hours after transfer from or to an acute care facility); newborn, still birth, cadaver
              admissions; non-acute care admissions; pediatric (less than 20 years of age), surgery,
              obstetrics, palliative care, mental health admission.




58                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                          Results Analysis




Hospital                    Number of hospital inpatient discharges where a patient was
Readmission                 readmitted to hospital within 30 days of index discharge
                                                                                          X 100
Percentage   =
(unadjusted)                Number of hospital inpatients discharged

Risk Adjustment: Accounts for differences in patient characteristics that may vary over years. Based
on the list of risk factors (e.g., age, sex, case mixing grouping, Charlson comorbidity score) published
by the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI), and the Alberta-built, provincial specific
logistic regression model using data from the past five years to estimate the Alberta average and
expected readmissions based on patients’ risk profile. The risk-adjusted rate is calculated using the
following formula:

                                        Observed cases
Risk-adjusted rate =                                                   X Alberta rate
                                        Expected cases

The methods used by Alberta and CIHI differ only in that Alberta applies the Alberta Rate instead of
the Canada Rate. Using the Alberta rate allows for timely reporting and calculation of results for sub-
populations. The limitation of this method is that the estimates produced in Alberta are not
comparable with other provinces produced by CIHI. Interprovincial comparisons are still possible
by using the CIHI estimates only (i.e., using the CIHI produced estimate for Alberta, and not the
Alberta produced estimate).

Source

Alberta’s Morbidity and Ambulatory Care Abstract Reporting System (MACAR)

Note: Data in MACAR is then provisioned to the ministry’s Business Intelligence warehouse. It is also
submitted to CIHI’s Discharge Abstract Database (DAD) and National Ambulatory Care Reporting
System (NACRS) datasets.



Performance Indicator (Outcome 3, Key Objective 3.1):
     Children by age two immunized for diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis (whooping cough),
     polio, Haemophilus influenza type b) (DTaP-IPV-Hib) and for measles, mumps, rubella

Methodology

The AHCIP Quarterly Population Registries (AHCIP) provides the basis for the cohorts. Individuals
who are residents of Alberta (including First Nations people) are followed until the earliest of (i)
immunized (ii) leaving Alberta, (iii) death, or (iv) end-of-study period. Immunization records from
Imm/ARI are linked to this cohort using Unique Lifetime Identifier. Residents of Lloydminster are
removed from the analysis, since those residents are captured as part of Saskatchewan Health.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                       59
Results Analysis



The coverage rates are based on a birth cohort and reported in percentage by ages of two. To be
considered immunized, a child must have received their age-appropriate dose(s) by their birthday
(e.g., if a child received a dose after their 2nd birthday, they are not counted as having received a
dose by age two). In terms of birth cohort, the 2024 coverage rates relate to the 2022 birth cohort
(i.e. those who were born in 2022) that turned age two in 2024.

Calculation: Childhood immunization coverage is calculated using a survival analysis (time-to-
immunization) method based on the specified population-based birth cohort. The analysis measures
the probability that the child will receive required vaccines by age two.

Source

AHCIP Quarterly Population Registries and Immunization/Adverse Reactions to Immunization
(Imm/ARI).




60                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                                               Financial Information




Financial Information

Table of Contents
   Reportimg Entity and Method Consolidation ……………………………………………………….…..63
   Ministry Financial Highlights…………………………………………………………………………………...64
          Consolidated Statement of Revenues and Expenses (unaudited)………………………...64
          Revenue and Expense Highlights……………………………………………………………………….65
          Expenses - Directly Incurred Detailed by Object (unaudited) ……………………………...69
   Supplemental Financial Information………………………………………………………………………….70
          Tangible Capital Assets (unaudited)…………………………………………………………………...70
          Portfolio Investments (unaudited)……………………………………………………………………..71
   Financial Statements of Other Reporting Entities………………………………………………………..72
          Alberta Health Services ....................................................................................................................... 73
          Health Quality Council of Alberta..................................................................................................133
    Financial Information ................................................................................................................................ 154
          Department of Health ........................................................................................................................ 155
          Ministry of Health ................................................................................................................................ 161
          Annual Report Extracts and Other Statutory Reports ......................................................162
          Public Interest Disclosure (Whistleblower Protection) Act................................................... 162




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                                                    61
Financial Information




                             Ministry of Health
                             Financial Information

                        Year Ended March 31, 2025




62                            Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Financial Information




Reporting Entity and Method Consolidation
  The consolidated ministry financial information is prepared in accordance with government’s stated
  accounting policies, which are based on Canadian Public Sector Accounting Standards.

  The reporting entity is the Ministry of Health for which the Minister of Health is accountable. The
  accounts of the Ministry of Health, which includes the Department of Health, Alberta Health Services
  (AHS), Primary Care Alberta (PCA), and Health Quality Council of Alberta (HQCA), are consolidated
  using the line-by-line method.

  The audited financial statements of AHS and HQCA are included in the annual report. Accounts of
  entities consolidated by AHS are listed in note 2a (i) and (ii) of AHS consolidated financial statements.
  PCA financial statements were not audited and published due to their short operational period, being
  operational effective February 1, 2025. Acute Care Alberta (ACA), established as a legal entity effective
  February 1, 2025, will be operational April 1, 2025.

 Under the line-by-line method, accounting policies of the consolidated entities are adjusted to conform
 to those of the government and the results of each line item in their financial statements (revenue,
 expense, assets, and liabilities) are included in government’s results. Revenue and expense, capital,
 investing and financing transactions, and related asset and liability balances between the consolidated
 entities have been eliminated. Restated budget and comparable reflect appropriation administration
 responsibilities for Continuing Care programs transferred to Ministry of Seniors, Community and Social
 Services. Additionally, mental health and addiction services were transferred from AHS to Recovery
 Alberta, an entity controlled and consolidated by Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction.

 A list of the individual entities making up the ministry are shown on the “Management’s Responsibility for
 Reporting” statement included in this annual report.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                          63
        Financial Information




        Ministry Financial Highlights
        Consolidated Statement of Revenues and Expenses (unaudited)
        Year ended March 31, 2025
         (in thousands)

                                                                       2025                    2024                  Change from
                                                            Budget            Actual           Actual            Budget     2024 Actual
                                                          (Restated)                         (Restated)
Revenues
 Internal Government Transfers                        $       379,441 $          428,556 $       418,925     $      49,115 $            9,631
 Transfers from Government of Canada                        6,469,821          6,443,737       6,088,175           (26,084)           355,562
 Revenue from Tobacco Settlement                                  -              712,530             -             712,530            712,530
 Premiums, Fees and Licences                                  661,024            701,558         661,946            40,534             39,612
 Investment Income                                             78,620            173,361         107,747            94,741             65,614
 Other Revenue                                                779,412            784,672         627,987             5,260            156,685
 Ministry Total                                             8,368,318          9,244,414       7,904,780           876,096          1,339,634
 Inter-Ministry Consolidation Adjustments                    (671,755)          (627,567)       (465,712)           44,188           (161,855)
Adjusted Ministry Total                                     7,696,563          8,616,847       7,439,068           920,284          1,177,779
Expenses - Directly Incurred
 Ministry Support Services                                     66,738            104,861          57,939            38,123             46,922
 Physician Compensation and Development                     6,679,611          7,150,758       6,415,470           471,147            735,288
 Acute Care                                                 4,456,007          4,719,389       4,419,457           263,382            299,932
 Diagnostic, Therapeutic, and Other Patient Service         2,507,930          2,569,171       2,443,061            61,241            126,110
 Drugs and Supplemental Health Benefits                     2,800,863          2,984,660       2,792,668           183,797            191,992
 Community Care                                             1,446,377          1,408,562       1,311,947           (37,815)            96,615
 Continuing Care                                            1,425,244          1,480,965       1,371,332            55,721            109,633
 Home Care                                                    930,200            958,955         843,510            28,755            115,445
 Population and Public Health                               1,102,015            907,892       1,005,866          (194,123)           (97,974)
 Emergency Medical Services                                   730,200            704,133         660,449           (26,067)            43,684
 Support Services                                           2,681,890          2,732,235       2,644,222            50,345             88,013
 Information Technology                                       983,437            932,964         861,976           (50,473)            70,988
 Administration                                               552,241            561,462         533,283             9,221             28,179
 Research and Education                                       117,478            134,831         123,025            17,353             11,806
 Infrastructure Support                                           -                  -               281               -                 (281)
 Other Health Services                                        572,077            636,826         568,987            64,749             67,839
 Debt Servicing                                                18,000             15,335          15,788            (2,665)              (453)
 Ministry Total                                            27,070,308         28,002,999      26,069,261           932,691          1,933,738
 Inter-Ministry Consolidation Adjustments                    (513,507)          (449,543)       (289,909)           63,964           (159,634)
Adjusted Ministry Total                                    26,556,801         27,553,456      25,779,352           996,655          1,774,104
Adjusted Annual Deficit                               $ (18,860,238) $ (18,936,609) $ (18,340,284)          $      (76,371) $        (596,325)




        64                                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                         Financial Information



Revenue and Expense Highlights
  Consolidated Revenues (prior to inter-ministry consolidation adjustments)
                                       Other Revenue
                                             8%                   Internal
                                                                Government
                     Investment                                  Transfers
                       Income                                       5%
                         2%

              Premiums, Fees
                and Licences
                     7%
      Revenue from
        Tobacco
       Settlement
           8%
                                                                            Transfers from
                                                                            Government of
                                                                               Canada
                                                                                70%




  Total revenue for the year was $9.2 billion, which was $876 million higher than budget mainly due
  to:
  •    Internal Government Transfers due to new grant initiatives including additional funding to support
       seniors aging with dignity in their community;
  •    Revenue from Tobacco Settlement due to the recent Court settlement decision against the tobacco
       companies – see note below;
  •    Premiums, Fees and Licenses due to increased clinical activity resulting in higher number of patients
       billable to non-residents of Canada, the Workers Compensation Board, and other provinces; and
  •    Investment Income due to increased net realized gains from active portfolio management, higher
       interest and dividend income as a result of strong market performance, and higher bond amortization
       income from the purchase of bonds and treasury bills at a discount.

  Actual revenue increased by $1.3 billion over prior year mainly due to:
  • Transfers from Government of Canada mainly due to Canada Health Transfer as a result of higher
     national entitlement and Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians, and new funding
     for Drugs for Rare Diseases;
  • Premiums, Fees and Licenses due to increased interprovincial billing rates and increased number of
     patients billable to non-residents of Canada;
  • Investment Income due to increased net realized gain from active portfolio management and
     increased interest and dividend due to favourable market conditions; and
  • Other Revenue mainly due to recoveries under the new transition services agreement between
     Alberta Health Services and Recovery Alberta.

  Note: On March 6, 2025, the Ontario Superior Court of Justice approved the settlement agreement
  arising from the litigation against three major tobacco companies to recover smoking related healthcare
  costs. The total settlement was $32.5 billion to be paid partly by up-front lump sum and partly through
  annual payments, as a percentage of annual net after tax income. The percentage starts at 85 percent
  of the net after tax income for the first 5 years, reduced by 5 percent for each increment of 5 years. The



Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                           65
Financial Information



     annual payments are reduced to 70 percent starting year 16 until the amount is fully paid. Provinces
     and Territories share of the allocation was $24.7 billion with upfront payment being $6.2 billion.
     Alberta’s share is roughly 12.63 percent, representing $3.1 billion of the total settlement with $783
     million being upfront payment and the balance to be paid annually over the settlement period.

     The Revenue from Tobacco settlement reported represents upfront payment of $783 million net legal
     fees of $70 million. The remaining balance has not been recorded given the significant uncertainty
     related to future annual payments which are based on future net after tax income. The balance will be
     recorded annually when there is certainty of the amount to be received.




66                                                                               Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                      Financial Information



Consolidated Expenses (prior to inter-ministry consolidation adjustments)



                              Information                               Other Health
                              Technology                                  Services                       Others*
               Support Services 3%                                          2%                             1%
                    10%
                                                                                                            Physician
                            Administration                                                               Compensation and
                                2%                                                                         Development
                                                                                                               26%
        Diagnostic, Therapeutic
        & Other Patient Services
                  9%
            Home Care                                                                                             Drugs and
               3%                                                                                             Supplemental Health
                                                                                                                    Benefits
       Community Care                                                                                                11%
           5%
                                                                                                     Population and
                Emergency Medical
                                                                                                      Public Health
                    Services                     Continuing Care               Acute Care
                                                                                                           3%
                      3%                               5%                         17%
  * includes Ministry Support Services, Research and Education, Debt Servicing, and Infrastructure Support.

  Total expense for the year was $28 billion, which was $933 million higher than budget mainly
  due to:
  •    Physician Compensation and Development primarily due to increase in physician service volumes,
       growth in utilization of physician services, and Clinical Alternative Relationship Plan expansions;
  •    Acute Care due to increased clinical activity and cost pressures from higher number of inpatients,
       emergency department visits, and operating room cases; use of agency nursing and overtime, and
       increase related to collective bargaining process;
  •    Diagnostic, Therapeutic and Other Patient Services due to increased clinical activity, higher patient
       volumes, and increase related to the collective bargaining process;
  •    Drugs and Supplemental Health due to increased benefit utilization driven by aging population and
       higher cost of medication, increased Pharmacy Services utilization as alternate to primary care
       providers, partially offset by higher than anticipated Product Listing Agreement recoveries;
  •    Continuing Care due to increased funding to long-term care providers to address increased activity
       and support additional hours of care, funding for seniors aging with dignity in their community, and
       increase related to collective bargaining process;
  •    Support Services due to increased costs related to collective bargaining process and cost of inventory
       transferred to Recovery Alberta; and
  •    Other Health Services due to population growth resulting in growth in optometry and oral surgery
       services and increased payments to Canadian Blood Services for higher than anticipated utilization
       of blood services and products.

  This was partially offset by lower than budgeted expenses in:
  •    Population and Public Health due to deferral of Primary Care initiatives until next fiscal year, delayed
       implementation of Health Innovation and Alberta Surgical Initiative, and reduced pharmacist injection
       services spending; and
  •    Information Technology due to resource constraints resulting in deferral of system enhancement
       projects.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                        67
Financial Information



     Actual expenses increased by $1.9 billion from prior year mainly due to:
     •   Physician Compensation and Development due to increase in physician service volumes, growth in
         utilization of physician services, and Clinical Alternative Relationship Plan expansions;
     •   Acute Care due to increased clinical activity and emergency department visits, higher number of
         inpatients, and increase related to the collective bargaining process;
     •   Diagnostic, Therapeutic and Other Patient Services due to increased clinical activity, higher patient
         volumes resulting in increased laboratory, CT and MRI testing, and increase related to the collective
         bargaining process;
     •   Drugs and Supplemental Health Benefits due to increased benefits utilization driven by an aging
         population, increased costs of drugs in various benefit programs, partially offset by increased Product
         Listing Agreement recoveries;
     •   Continuing Care due to increased funding to long-term care providers for contract inflation, additional
         funding to support Continuing Care Transformation Initiatives, additional long term care beds
         introduced related to the Continuing Care Capacity Plan Initiative, and increase related to the
         collective bargaining process;
     •   Community Care due to opening of new designated supportive-living and community beds, contract
         inflation related to community care providers, and increase related to the collective bargaining
         process;
     •   Home Care due to increased activity to provide additional hours and choices to home care patients,
         additional funding provided to home care operators to support seniors aging with dignity in their
         community, and increase related to collective bargaining process;
     •   Support Services due to costs associated with the transition of community lab services to AHS
         partway through prior fiscal year and increase related to the collective bargaining process;
     •   Information Technology due to higher amortization related to Connect Care system additions during
         the year, resumption of projects deferred from prior year, and increase related to collective bargaining
         process; and
     •   Other Health Services due to volume growth in optometry and oral surgery services as a result of
         population growth and increased payments to Canadian Blood Services for blood services and
         products.

     This was partially offset by decrease in:
     •   Population and Public Health due to COVID-19 rapid tests write-offs in prior year partially offset by
         costs related to implementation of Modernizing Alberta's Primary Health Care System (MAPS)
         initiatives in current year.




68                                                                                 Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Financial Information



Expenses – Directly Incurred Detailed by Object (unaudited)
(in thousands)

                                    2025 Actual (unaudited)

                     Amortization of                    Consumption of
                     Tangible Capital                      Inventory
                    Assets & Financial                    $1,283,905
                    Transactions and                          4%
                          Other
                        $747,204
                           3%                                                         Grants
                                                                                    $8,956,523
                                                                                       32%




   Salaries, Wages and
    Employee Benefits
        $9,823,679
           35%




                                                                             Supplies and
                                                                               Services
                                                                              $7,191,688
                                                                                 26%




  • Ministry’s expenses were primarily for grants, salaries, wages and employee benefits, and supplies
     and services, which combined, accounted for 93 percent of the total expense.
  • Grants were $9.0 billion or 32 percent of total expense, primarily for Physician Compensation and
     Development, and Drugs and Supplemental Health Benefit programs. Other grant expenses included
     restricted funding to support organizations and communities through various programs or initiatives,
     and funding for Out-of-Province Health Care Services and Allied Health Services.
  • Salaries, wages and employee benefits were $9.8 billion or 35 percent of total expense, supporting
     delivery of health services across the province.
  • Supplies and services were $7.2 billion or 26 percent of total expense, mainly attributed to contracts
     with voluntary and private health service providers, and various purchased supplies and services.
  • Amortization of tangible capital assets ($589 million), consumption of inventory ($1.3 billion), and
     financial transactions and other expenses ($158 million) comprised the balance of ministry’s total
     expense.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                          69
Financial Information




Supplemental Financial Information
Tangible Capital Assets (unaudited)

     Year ended March 31, 2025
     (in thousands)

                                      Computer Hardware
                                                                  Land
                                        and Software
                                                                $120,925
                                          $606,312
                             Equipment                             1%
                                            6%
                              $758,002
                                7%

              Land Improvements
              & Leasehold Assets
                   $163,216
                     1%




                                                                           Building
                                                                          $9,148,835
                                                                             85%



     • Total net book value of tangible capital assets was $10.8 billion.
     • Buildings are the largest component and account for $9.1 billion or 85 percent of the ministry’s total
        tangible capital assets.
     • The remainder of the ministry’s tangible capital assets comprises of computer hardware and software,
        equipment, land, land improvements, and leasehold assets.
     • Tangible capital assets of the Ministry are recognized at historical cost and are amortized, excluding
        land, on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets.
     • Buildings and Equipment include $295 million (net of amortization) for obligations associated with
        retirement of tangible capital assets.


Note: The Government of Alberta enacted the Real Property Governance Act in 2024, as part of its
efforts to centralize the management of public property to enhance accountability and transparency.
Under this legislation, all freehold real property owned by AHS will be transferred to the Ministry of
Infrastructure effective April 1, 2025.



70                                                                                  Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Financial Information



 Portfolio Investments (unaudited)

   Year ended March 31, 2025
   (in thousands)

                                                          2025                                 2024
                                                   Cost            Fair Value         Cost             Fair Value
Interest bearing securities:
   Deposits and short-term securities        $       685,016   $        689,144   $     746,326    $           746,331
   Bonds and mortgages                             1,413,967          1,444,907       1,326,783              1,304,133
                                                   2,098,983          2,134,051       2,073,109              2,050,464
Equities:
  Canadian equities                                  172,446            162,401         181,927               199,709
  Global equities                                    302,168            344,898         224,040               299,807
                                                     474,614            507,299         405,967               499,516

Real estate                                           31,069             38,777          30,926                 37,712
Total Portfolio Investments                  $     2,604,666   $      2,680,127   $   2,510,002    $         2,587,692


The following is a breakdown of portfolio investments:

                                                           2025                               2024
                                                   Cost         Fair Value            Cost         Fair Value
Operating                                    $     2,494,746 $     2,570,207      $   2,404,729 $     2,482,419
Endowments                                           109,920         109,920            105,273         105,273
Total Portfolio Investments                  $     2,604,666 $     2,680,127      $   2,510,002 $     2,587,692




 Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                       71
Financial Information




Financial Statements of Other Reporting Entities


Table of Contents
Index of Audited Financial Statements
         Alberta Health Services ....................................................................................................................... 73
         Health Quality Council of Alberta..................................................................................................133




72                                                                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                                  Financial Information




Alberta Health Services
Financial Statements
Table of Contents

         Management's Responsibility for Financial Reporting ………………………………………. 74

         Independent Auditor’s Report ......................................................................................................... 75

         Consolidated Statement of Operations ......................................................................................... 78

         Consolidated Statement of Financial Position ........................................................................... 79

         Consolidated Statement of Change in Net Debt ........................................................................ 80

         Consolidated Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses .......................................... 81

         Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows ......................................................................................... 82

         Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements ...................................................................... 83

         Schedule 1 – Consolidated Schedule of Expenses By Object..............................................120

         Schedule 2 – Schedules of Renumeration and Benefits .......................................................121

         Schedule 3 - Consolidated Schedule of Segment Disclosures ............................................ 129

         Schedule 4 – Consolidated Schedule of The Revised Budget ............................................. 131




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                                     73
Financial Information




Management’s Responsibility for Financial Reporting


The accompanying consolidated financial statements for the year ended March 31, 2025 are the responsibility of
management and have been reviewed and approved by senior management. The consolidated financial statements
were prepared in accordance with Canadian Public Sector Accounting Standards and include certain disclosures
required by the financial directives issued by Alberta Health, and of necessity include some amounts based on
estimates and judgment.

To discharge its responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of financial reporting, management maintains systems of
financial management and internal control which give consideration to costs, benefits and risks that are designed to:

     •   provide reasonable assurance that transactions are properly authorized, executed in accordance with
         prescribed legislation and regulations, and properly recorded so as to maintain accountability of public funds;
     •   safeguard the assets and properties of the “Province of Alberta” that are the responsibility of Alberta Health
         Services.

The Official Administrator meets with management and the Auditor General of Alberta to review financial matters, and
approves the consolidated financial statements upon finalization of the audit. The Auditor General of Alberta has free
access to the Official Administrator.

The Auditor General of Alberta provides an independent audit of the consolidated financial statements. His examination
is conducted in accordance with Canadian Generally Accepted Auditing Standards and includes tests and procedures
which allow him to report on the fairness of the consolidated financial statements prepared by management.




[Originally signed by]                                             [Originally signed by]
 Andre Tremblay                                                   Emily Ma
 Interim President and Chief Executive Officer                    Interim Vice President and Chief
 Alberta Health Services                                          Financial Officer
                                                                  Alberta Health Services




June 2, 2025




74                                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                     Financial Information




Independent Auditor’s Report


To the Official Administrator of Alberta Health Services, the Minister of Primary and Preventative
Health Services, and the Minister of Hospital and Surgical Health Services


Report on the Consolidated Financial Statements

Opinion
I have audited the consolidated financial statements of Alberta Health Services (the Group), which
comprise the consolidated statement of financial position as at March 31, 2025, and the
consolidated statements of operations, remeasurement gains and losses, change in net debt, and
cash flows for the year then ended, and notes to the consolidated financial statements, including a
summary of significant accounting policies.

In my opinion, the accompanying consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material
respects, the consolidated financial position of the Group as at March 31, 2025, and the results of its
operations, its remeasurement gains and losses, its changes in net debt, and its cash flows for the
year then ended in accordance with Canadian public sector accounting standards.

Basis for opinion
I conducted my audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards. My
responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor's Responsibilities for the
Audit of the Consolidated Financial Statements section of my report. I am independent of the Group
in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to my audit of the consolidated
financial statements in Canada, and I have fulfilled my other ethical responsibilities in accordance
with these requirements. I believe that the audit evidence I have obtained is sufficient and
appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion.

Emphasis of matter
I draw attention to Note 1, Note 3 and Note 30 of the consolidated financial statements, which
describes the authority, purpose and operations, restructuring, and subsequent events of the
Group. My opinion is not modified in respect of this matter.

Other information
Management is responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the
information included in the Annual Report, but does not include the consolidated financial
statements and my auditor’s report thereon. The Annual Report is expected to be made available to
me after the date of this auditor’s report.

My opinion on the consolidated financial statements does not cover the other information and I do
not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.

In connection with my audit of the consolidated financial statements, my responsibility is to read
the other information identified above and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is



Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                       75
Financial Information



materially inconsistent with the consolidated financial statements or my knowledge obtained in the
audit, or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.

If, based on the work I will perform on this other information, I conclude that there is a material
misstatement of this other information, I am required to communicate the matter to those charged
with governance.

Responsibilities of management and those charged with governance for the consolidated
financial statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the consolidated financial
statements in accordance with Canadian public sector accounting standards, and for such internal
control as management determines is necessary to enable the preparation of the consolidated
financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.

In preparing the consolidated financial statements, management is responsible for assessing the
Group’s ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going
concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless an intention exists to liquidate or to
cease operations, or there is no realistic alternative but to do so.

Those charged with governance are responsible for overseeing the Group’s financial reporting
process.

Auditor's responsibilities for the audit of the consolidated financial statements
My objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial
statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to
issue an auditor's report that includes my opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of
assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with Canadian generally
accepted auditing standards will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the
aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on
the basis of these consolidated financial statements.

As part of an audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards, I exercise
professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit. I also:
• Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements,
    whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks,
    and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion.
    The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one
    resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions,
    misrepresentations, or the override of internal control.
• Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit
    procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an
    opinion on the effectiveness of the Group’s internal control.
• Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting
    estimates and related disclosures made by management.
• Conclude on the appropriateness of management’s use of the going concern basis of accounting
    and, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to
    events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Group’s ability to continue as a going
    concern. If I conclude that a material uncertainty exists, I am required to draw attention in my


76                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Financial Information



    auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the consolidated financial statements or, if such
    disclosures are inadequate, to modify my opinion. My conclusions are based on the audit
    evidence obtained up to the date of my auditor’s report. However, future events or conditions
    may cause the Group to cease to continue as a going concern.
•   Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the consolidated financial
    statements, including the disclosures, and whether the consolidated financial statements
    represent the underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation.
•   Plan and perform the group audit to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the
    financial information of the entities or business units within the Group as a basis for forming an
    opinion on the group financial statements. I am responsible for the direction, supervision and
    review of the audit work performed for purposes of the group audit. I remain solely responsible
    for my audit opinion.

I communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the planned
scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in
internal control that I identify during my audit.




[Originally signed by W. Doug Wylie FCPA, FCMA, ICD.D]
Auditor General

June 2, 2025
Edmonton, Alberta




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                        77
Financial Information




Consolidated Statement of Operations
                                    CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS
                                            YEAR ENDED MARCH 31
                                                                      2025                                 2024
                                                           Budget
                                                                                                          Actual
                                                           (Note 4)                     Actual
                                                                                                         (Note 29)
                                                         (Schedule 4)
 Revenues:
  Alberta Health transfers
    Base operating                                            $     14,602,924 $       14,562,674 $        15,138,434
    One-time base operating                                                  -            362,916             286,083
    Other operating                                                  1,653,528          1,640,502           1,681,469
    Recognition of expended deferred capital revenue                   102,100            110,130             106,297
  Other government transfers (Note 5)                                1,652,176            910,784             558,891
  Fees and charges                                                     621,000            667,747             625,668
  Ancillary operations                                                  92,700             95,426              87,178
  Donations and non-government
    contributions (Note 6)                                             170,900              203,410           213,382
  Investment and other income (Note 7)                                 248,700              550,210           330,376

 TOTAL REVENUES                                                     19,144,028         19,103,799          19,027,778

 Expenses:
  Continuing care                                                    1,425,800          1,484,701            1,375,360
  Community care                                                     2,132,200          1,667,596            1,983,628
  Home care                                                            930,200            959,280              843,709
  Acute care                                                         6,081,528          6,208,453            6,084,875
  Emergency medical services                                           735,400            709,763              665,954
  Diagnostic and therapeutic services                                2,956,600          3,038,465            2,932,784
  Population and public health                                         420,900            431,697              439,173
  Research and education                                               378,400            375,341              352,707
  Information technology                                               804,300            813,626              793,775
  Support services (Note 8)                                          2,713,800          2,764,742            2,798,372
  Administration (Note 9)                                              564,900            576,314              573,810
  Net effect of restructuring transaction (Note 3(a))                        -              2,761                    -

 TOTAL EXPENSES                                                     19,144,028         19,032,739          18,844,147

 ANNUAL OPERATING SURPLUS                                                     -              71,060           183,631

 Accumulated surplus, beginning of year                              1,304,458          1,304,458            1,120,827
 Accumulated surplus, end of year (Note 23)                   $      1,304,458 $        1,375,518 $          1,304,458

The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these consolidated financial statements.




78                                                                                 Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                               Financial Information




 Consolidated Statement of Financial Position

                              CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION
                                            AS AT MARCH 31
                                                                    2025                               2024

                                                                               Actual                 Actual

 Financial Assets:
  Cash and cash equivalents                                                $        526,238    $            243,462
  Portfolio investments (Note 11)                                                 2,677,619               2,587,692
  Accounts receivable (Note 12)                                                     979,173                 755,525
                                                                                  4,183,030               3,586,679

 Liabilities:
  Accounts payable and accrued liabilities (Note 14)                              2,633,239               1,855,955
  Employee future benefits (Note 15)                                                742,757                 818,539
  Unexpended deferred operating revenue (Note 16)                                   532,642                 697,922
  Unexpended deferred capital revenue (Note 17)                                     253,901                 214,072
  Debt (Note 19)                                                                    375,587                 415,813
  Asset retirement obligations (Note 20)                                            635,463                 539,421
                                                                                  5,173,589               4,541,722

 NET DEBT                                                                          (990,559)              (955,043)

 Non-Financial Assets:
  Tangible capital assets (Note 21)                                              10,761,267              10,467,655
  Inventories of supplies (Note 22)                                                 189,437                 197,169
  Prepaid expenses, deposits, and other non-financial assets                        397,629                 355,181
                                                                                 11,348,333              11,020,005
 NET ASSETS BEFORE EXPENDED DEFERRED CAPITAL REVENUE                             10,357,774              10,064,962
 Expended deferred capital revenue (Note 18)                                      8,912,554               8,696,431

 NET ASSETS                                                                       1,445,220               1,368,531

 Net Assets is comprised of:
  Accumulated surplus (Note 23)                                                   1,375,518               1,304,458
  Accumulated remeasurement gains                                                    69,702                  64,073

                                                                           $      1,445,220    $          1,368,531

 Contractual Rights (Note 13)
 Contractual Obligations, Contingent Liabilities and Other Matters (Note 24)

 The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these consolidated financial statements.


 Approved by:




______[Originally signed by]____________________________
           Andre Tremblay
           Official Administrator
           Alberta Health Services




 Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                79
Financial Information




Consolidated Statement of Change in Net Debt

                                   CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGE IN NET DEBT
                                               YEAR ENDED MARCH 31
                                                                       2025                                    2024
                                                              Budget
                                                                             Actual                           Actual
                                                              (Note 4)

     Annual operating surplus                                        $           -   $        71,060     $        183,631

     Effect of changes in tangible capital assets:
      Acquisition of tangible capital assets:
        Purchased                                                        (407,100)          (487,388)           (452,501)
        Purchased as part of DynaLIFEDX asset purchase                           -                  -            (71,760)
        Leased                                                            (22,000)           (15,185)            (37,753)
        Constructed by Alberta Infrastructure on behalf of AHS           (302,000)          (258,231)           (198,774)
        Contributed by others                                                    -                  -                 (24)
        Revision to asset retirement cost estimates                              -          (101,256)              41,773
      Amortization and loss on disposals/write-downs of
        tangible capital assets                                           561,900            563,648              555,033
      Transferred as a result of restructuring (Note 3(a))                      -              4,800                    -

     Effect of other changes:
      Net increase in expended deferred capital revenue                   105,500            218,468              170,966
      Net decrease in expended deferred operating
          revenue                                                                -                  -           (116,636)
      Net decrease in inventories of supplies                                    -              7,732             118,442
      Net (increase) decrease in prepaid expenses, deposits
         and other non-financial assets                                    49,000            (59,629)           (118,968)
      Net increase in other non-financial assets due to
         DynaLIFEDX asset purchase                                               -                   -           (12,845)
      Net decrease in other non-financial assets and expended
         deferred capital revenue due to restructuring (Note 3(a))              -              14,836                   -
      Net remeasurement gains for the year                                 20,000               5,629              43,803
     Decrease (increase) in net debt for the year                           5,300            (35,516)             104,387

     Net debt, beginning of year                                         (955,043)          (955,043)         (1,059,430)

     Net debt, end of year                                           $   (949,743)   $      (990,559)    $      (955,043)


The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these consolidated financial statements




80                                                                                   Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                              Financial Information




Consolidated Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses
                     CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF REMEASUREMENT GAINS AND LOSSES
                                       YEAR ENDED MARCH 31
                                                                    2025                                  2024

                                                                                     Actual              Actual


 Unrestricted unrealized (losses) gains attributable to:
  Derivatives                                                                  $          (4,643)   $             586
                                                                                                                    2
  Portfolio investments
   Quoted in an active market                                                              (360)                6,600
   Designated at fair value                                                               58,408               35,815

 Amounts reclassified to the Consolidated Statement of Operations:
  Derivatives                                                                             (1,369)                 (998)

  Portfolio investments
   Quoted in an active market                                                            (6,086)                     -
   Designated at fair value                                                             (40,321)                 1,800


 Net remeasurement gains for the year                                                      5,629               43,803
 Accumulated remeasurement gains, beginning of year                                       64,073               20,270
 Accumulated remeasurement gains, end of year (Note 11)                        $          69,702    $          64,073




      The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these consolidated financial statements.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                 81
    Financial Information




    Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
                                     CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
                                             YEAR ENDED MARCH 31
                                                                    2025                                       2024

                                                                               Actual                         Actual

Operating transactions:
 Annual operating surplus                                             $                   71,060     $                 183,631
 Non-cash items:
    Amortization and loss on disposals/write-downs of
      tangible capital assets                                                             563,648                       555,033
    Revenue recognized for acquisition of land                                               (168)                            -
    Recognition of expended deferred capital revenue                                    (365,803)                     (355,407)
    Recognition of expended deferred operating revenue                                           -                    (116,636)
    Gain on disposal of portfolio investments                                            (74,048)                      (13,736)
    Change in employee future benefits                                                     (2,007)                       24,268
    Net effect of restructuring transaction                                                  2,761                            -
 (Increase) decrease in:
    Cash transferred due to restructuring (Note 3(a))                                    (53,284)                             -
    Accounts receivable related to operating transactions                               (235,140)                      (14,564)
    Inventories of supplies                                                                 7,732                       118,442
    Prepaid expenses, deposits, and other non-financial assets                           (59,629)                     (118,968)
 Increase (decrease) in:
    Accounts payable and accrued liabilities                                             669,650                        23,669
    Unexpended deferred operating revenue                                                (29,954)                      115,570
    Asset retirement obligations                                                          (5,214)                       (1,978)
    Cash provided by operating transactions                                              489,604                       399,324

Capital transactions:
  Purchased tangible capital assets                                                     (487,388)                     (452,501)
  DynaLIFEDX purchase consideration net of cash acquired                                        -                      (29,388)
 Cash applied to capital transactions                                                   (487,388)                     (481,889)

Investing transactions:
  Purchase of portfolio investments                                                 (6,658,023)                    (5,284,617)
  Proceeds on disposals of portfolio investments                                      6,634,834                      4,948,882
  Cash applied to investing transactions                                                (23,189)                     (335,735)

Financing transactions:
  Restricted capital contributions received                                              372,924                       367,372
  Unexpended deferred capital revenue returned                                            (6,887)                       (3,626)
  Proceeds from debt                                                                            -                        20,000
  Principal payments on debt                                                             (40,226)                      (38,275)
  Payments on obligations under capital leases                                           (22,422)                      (17,745)
  Net receipt (repayment) of life lease deposits                                              360                         (613)
  Cash provided by financing transactions                                                303,749                       327,113

Increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents                                         282,776                       (91,187)

Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year                                             243,462                       334,649

Cash and cash equivalents, end of year                                $                  526,238     $                 243,462

         The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these consolidated financial statements.




    82                                                                                     Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                   Financial Information




Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the Year
Ended March 31, 2025
   Note 1     Authority, Purpose and Operations

              Alberta Health Services (AHS) was established under the Regional Health Authorities Act (Alberta),
              effective April 1, 2009, as a result of the merger of 12 formerly separate health entities in Alberta. AHS
              is currently undergoing a significant restructuring which aligns with the Provincial Health Agencies Act
              (Alberta) (PHA Act). According to the PHA Act, the restructuring establishes four sector-based provincial
              health agencies: Acute Care Alberta (ACA), Primary Care Alberta (PCA), Assisted Living Alberta (ALA),
              and Recovery Alberta. As a result, through a ministerial order, all powers, duties, responsibilities or
              functions will be transferred from AHS to the newly established provincial health agencies, provincial
              health corporations, or other successors. Pursuant to Ministerial Order 800/2024, on completion of the
              transfers, AHS will be wound up as a regional health authority. In accordance with the Alberta Health
              Services Provincial Health Corporation Regulation (Alberta), the entity Alberta Health Services
              Provincial Health Corporation (PHC) was established on June 1, 2025, for the purposes of delivering
              health services in the acute care health services sector. This new PHC is accountable to Acute Care
              Alberta.

              To date, provincial health agencies for the mental health and addiction, primary care, and acute care
              sectors have been established. Recovery Alberta, the provincial health agency responsible for the
              mental health and addiction sector, was legally established on July 1, 2024, became operational on
              September 1, 2024, and is accountable to the Minister of Mental Health and Addiction. PCA, the
              provincial health agency responsible for the primary care sector, was established on November 18,
              2024, became operational on February 1, 2025, and is accountable to the Minister of Health. ACA, the
              provincial health agency responsible for the acute care sector was established on February 1, 2025,
              and became operational on April 1, 2025. Matters pertaining to restructuring transactions occurring in
              the current year are discussed further in Note 3. Matters pertaining to restructuring transactions
              occurring subsequent to year end are discussed further in Note 30.

              Pursuant to Section 5 of the Regional Health Authorities Act (Alberta) and prior to the effective date of
              the Provincial Health Agencies Act on June 21, 2024, AHS was responsible in Alberta to:
                   •   promote and protect the health of the population and work toward the prevention of disease
                       and injury;
                   •   assess on an ongoing basis the health needs of the population;
                   •   determine priorities in the provision of health services and allocate resources accordingly;
                   •   ensure that reasonable access to quality health services is provided and;
                   •   promote the provision of health services in a manner that is responsive to the needs of
                       individuals and communities and supports the integration of services and facilities.
              Pursuant to Section 5 of the Provincial Health Agencies Act (Alberta), effective June 21, 2024, AHS is
              responsible in Alberta to:
                  •   promote and protect the health of the population and work toward the prevention of disease
                      and injury;
                  •   assess on an ongoing basis the health needs of the population;
                  •   support that reasonable access to quality health services is provided and;
                  •   promote the delivery of health services in a manner that is responsive to the needs of individuals
                      and communities and supports the integration of services and facilities.


              AHS is accountable to the Minister of Health (the Minister). The responsibilities under section 5 of the
              PHA Act do not apply to AHS with respect to health services that have been transferred by ministerial
              order to one or more provincial health agencies or other successor. Additionally, AHS has entered into
              a Transition Services Framework Agreement with each operational PHA to provide clinical and
              corporate support services.

The AHS consolidated financial statements include the assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses associated with its
responsibilities.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                      83
Financial Information



     Note 2   Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices

              (a) Basis of Presentation

                  These consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with Canadian Public
                  Sector Accounting Standards. In addition, the consolidated financial statements include certain
                  disclosures required by the financial directives issued by Alberta Health (AH).

                  These consolidated financial statements reflect the assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses of
                  the reporting entity, which is comprised of the organizations controlled by AHS as noted below:

                  (i)    Controlled Entities

                         AHS controls the following three wholly owned subsidiaries:

                          • Alberta Precision Laboratories Ltd. - provides medical diagnostic services throughout
                            Alberta.
                          • Capital Care Group Inc. - manages continuing care programs and facilities in the Edmonton
                            area.
                          • Carewest - manages continuing care programs and facilities in the Calgary area.

                         AHS has majority representation on, or the right to appoint, the governance boards,
                         indicating control of the following entities:

                          • Foundations:

                            The largest foundations controlled by AHS are the Alberta Cancer Foundation and the
                            Calgary Health Foundation. AHS also controls 33 other foundations that facilitate
                            fundraising for various initiatives including enhancements to healthcare delivery (including
                            equipment), programs, renovations, and research and education.

                          • Provincial Health Authorities of Alberta Liability and Property Insurance Plan (LPIP):

                            The LPIP’s main purpose is to share the risks of general and professional liability to lessen
                            the impact on any one healthcare subscriber. Effective April 1, 2020, the LPIP ceased
                            providing new liability coverage and continues in operation for the limited purpose of winding
                            up its affairs.

                            The LPIP has a fiscal year end of December 31, 2024. Significant transactions occurring
                            between this date and March 31, 2025 have been recorded in these consolidated financial
                            statements.

                         All inter-entity accounts and transactions between these organizations and AHS are eliminated
                         upon consolidation.

                  (ii) Government Partnerships

                         AHS proportionately consolidates its 50% ownership interest in the Northern Alberta Clinical
                         Trials Centre (NACTRC) partnership with the University of Alberta, and its 33.33% ownership
                         interest in the Institute for Reconstructive Sciences in Medicine (iRSM) partnership with the
                         University of Alberta and Covenant Health (Note 26). Additionally, AHS proportionately
                         consolidated its 50% ownership interests in 39 (2024 – 39) Primary Care Network (PCN)
                         partnerships with physician groups up until February 1, 2025.

                         AHS had entered into local primary care initiative agreements to jointly manage and operate
                         the delivery of primary care services to achieve the PCN plan objectives, and to contract and
                         hold property interests required in the delivery of PCN services. Effective February 1, 2025, due
                         to the restructuring, AHS’ 50% ownership interests in the 39 PCNs has been transferred to
                         PCA, and AHS is no longer named as a partner (Note 3(a)).

                        All inter-entity accounts and transactions between these organizations and AHS are eliminated
                        upon consolidation.



84                                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                    Financial Information



   Note 2     Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

                  (iii) Trusts under Administration

                        These consolidated financial statements do not include trusts administered on behalf of others
                        (Note 27).

                  (iv) Other

                        AHS contracts with various voluntary and private health service providers to provide certain
                        health services throughout Alberta. The largest of these service providers is Covenant Health,
                        a denominational health care organization, providing a full spectrum of care including operating
                        several hospitals and long-term care facilities. Covenant Health is an independent, separate
                        legal entity with a separate Board of Directors and accordingly, these consolidated financial
                        statements do not include their assets, liabilities or results of operations. However, the
                        payments for contracts with health service providers such as Covenant Health are recorded as
                        expenses in the Consolidated Statement of Operations.

                        In addition, AHS provides administrative services to certain foundations and contracted health
                        care providers not included in these consolidated financial statements.

             (b) Revenue Recognition

                        All revenues are recorded on an accrual basis, except when the accrual cannot be determined
                        within a reasonable degree of certainty or when estimation is impracticable. Revenues from
                        transactions with performance obligations are recognized when AHS provides the promised
                        goods and/or services to a payor. Revenue from transactions with no performance obligations
                        are recognized at their realizable value when AHS has the authority to claim or retain an inflow
                        of economic resources and identifies a past transaction or event that gives rise to an asset.
                        Unallocated costs comprising of materials and services contributed by related parties in support
                        of AHS’ operations, are not recognized in these consolidated financial statements.

                  (i)   Government Transfers

                        Transfers from AH, other Province of Alberta ministries and agencies, and other government
                        entities are referred to as government transfers.

                        Government transfers and, if applicable, the associated externally restricted investment income
                        are recorded as deferred revenue when the stipulations together with AHS’ actions and
                        communications as to the use of the transfer, create a liability. These transfers are recognized
                        as revenue as the stipulations are met and, when applicable, AHS complies with the
                        communicated use of the transfer.

                        All other government transfers, without stipulations for the use of the transfer, are recorded as
                        revenue when the transfer is authorized and AHS meets the eligibility criteria.

                        Deferred revenue consists of unexpended deferred operating revenue (Note 16), unexpended
                        deferred capital revenue (Note 17), and expended deferred capital revenue (Note 18). The term
                        deferred revenue in these consolidated financial statements refers to the components of
                        deferred revenue as described.

                  (ii) Donations and Non-Government Contributions

                        Donations and non-government contributions are received from individuals, corporations,
                        registered charities, and other not-for-profit organizations. Donations and non-government
                        contributions may be unrestricted or externally restricted for operating or capital purposes.

                        Unrestricted donations, and non-government contributions are recorded as revenue in the year
                        received or in the year the funds are committed to AHS if the amount can be reasonably
                        estimated and collection is reasonably assured.

                        Externally restricted donations, non-government contributions, and, if applicable, the
                        associated externally restricted investment income are recorded as deferred revenue if the
                        terms for their use, or the terms along with AHS’ actions and communications as to their use.
                        create a liability. These resources are recognized as revenue as the terms are met and, when
                        applicable, AHS complies with the communicated use.



Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                       85
Financial Information



     Note 2   Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

                        In-kind contributions of services and materials from non-related parties are recorded at fair
                        value when such value can reasonably be determined. While volunteers contribute a significant
                        amount of time each year to assist AHS, the value of their services is not recognized as revenue
                        and expenses in the consolidated financial statements because fair value cannot be reasonably
                        determined.

                        Endowment contributions are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Operations in the
                        period in which they are received or receivable.

                  (iii) Transfers and Donations related to Land

                        Transfers and donations for the purchase of land are recorded as deferred revenue when
                        received and as revenue when the land is purchased. In-kind donations of land from non-related
                        entities are recorded as revenue at the fair value of the land. When AHS cannot determine the
                        fair value, it records such donations at nominal value. In-kind donations of land from related
                        entities are recorded as revenue at the net book value of the transferring entity.

                  (iv) Fees and Charges, Ancillary Operations, and Other Income

                        Fees and charges, ancillary operations, and other income are considered revenue arising from
                        exchange transactions with performance obligations. These are recognized in the year that
                        goods are delivered or services are provided by AHS. Amounts received for which goods or
                        services have not been provided by year-end are recorded as deferred revenue.

                  (v) Investment Income

                        Investment income includes dividend income, interest income, and realized gains or losses on
                        the sale of portfolio investments. Unrealized gains and losses on portfolio investments
                        (excluding gains or losses from restricted transfers, endowments, or donations) are recognized
                        in the Consolidated Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses until the related portfolio
                        investments are sold. When realized, these gains or losses are recognized in the Consolidated
                        Statement of Operations. Investment income and unrealized gains and losses from restricted
                        transfers including endowments or donations are deferred until recognized according to the
                        provisions within the individual funding agreements.

              (c) Expenses

                  Expenses are reported on an accrual basis. The cost of all goods consumed and services received
                  during the year are expensed. Interest expense includes debt servicing costs.

                  Expenses include grants and transfers under shared cost agreements. Grants and transfers are
                  recorded as expenses when the transfer is authorized and eligibility criteria have been met by the
                  recipient.

              (d) Financial Instruments
Financial instruments comprise financial assets and financial liabilities. Financial assets are assets that could be used
to discharge existing liabilities or finance future operations and are not for consumption in the normal course of
operations. Financial liabilities are contractual obligations to deliver cash or another financial asset to another entity
or to exchange financial instruments with another entity under conditions that are potentially unfavourable to AHS.




86                                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                        Financial Information



Note 2      Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

              All of AHS’ financial assets and financial liabilities are initially recorded at their fair value. The following
              table identifies AHS’ financial assets and financial liabilities and identifies how they are subsequently
              measured:

                Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities            Subsequent Measurement and Recognition
                Portfolio investments                                 Measured at fair value with unrealized changes in fair
                                                                      values recognized in the Consolidated Statement of
                                                                      Remeasurement Gains and Losses or deferred revenue
                                                                      until realized, at which time the cumulative changes in fair
                                                                      value are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of
                                                                      Operations.

                Cash and cash equivalents, accounts                   Measured at cost or amortized cost.
                receivable, payroll payable and related accrued
                liabilities, trade accounts payable and accrued
                liabilities, other liabilities and debt


              Amortized cost is the amount at which a financial instrument asset or a financial instrument liability is
              measured at initial recognition minus principal repayments, plus or minus the cumulative amortization
              using the effective interest method of any difference between that initial amount and the maturity
              amount, and minus any reduction (directly or through the use of an allowance account) for impairment
              or uncollectibility.

              AHS records equity investments quoted in an active market at fair value and may choose to record other
              financial assets under the fair value category if there is an investment strategy to evaluate the
              performance of a group of these financial assets on a fair value basis. AHS has elected to record all
              portfolio investments at fair value. The relative reliability of information used to measure the fair value
              is disclosed in Note 11.

              Derivatives are recorded at fair value in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. Derivatives
              with a positive or negative fair value are recognized as increases or decreases to portfolio investments
              respectively. Unrealized gains and losses from changes in the fair value of derivatives are recognized
              in the Consolidated Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses until realized, at which time the
              gains or losses are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Operations.

              Contractual obligations are evaluated for the existence of embedded derivatives. AHS measures and
              recognizes embedded derivatives separately from the host contract when the economic characteristics
              and risk of the embedded derivative are not closely related to those of the host contract, when it meets
              the definition of a derivative and when the entire contract is not measured at fair value. An election can
              be made to either measure the entire contract at fair value or measure the value of the derivative
              component separately when characteristics of the derivative are not closely related to the economic
              characteristics and risks of the contract itself. Contracts to buy or sell non-financial items for AHS’ normal
              course of business are not recognized as financial assets or liabilities. AHS does not have any
              embedded derivatives.

              All financial assets are assessed for impairment on an annual basis. When a decline is determined to
              be other than temporary, the amount of the loss is reported as a realized loss on the Consolidated
              Statement of Operations. A write-down of a portfolio investment to reflect a loss in value is not reversed
              for a subsequent increase in value.

              A financial liability or a part thereof is derecognized when it is extinguished.

              Transaction costs associated with the acquisition and disposal of portfolio investments are expensed as
              incurred. Investment management fees are expensed as incurred. The purchase and disposition of
              portfolio investments are recognized on the trade date.

         (e) Cash and Cash Equivalents
             Cash is comprised of cash on hand and demand deposits. Cash equivalents include amounts in
             interest bearing accounts and are subject to an insignificant risk of change in value. Cash and cash
             equivalents are held for the purpose of meeting short-term commitments rather than for investment
             purposes.



Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                            87
Financial Information



     Note 2   Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

              (f)   Accounts receivable
                    Accounts receivable are recognized at the lower of cost or net recoverable value. A valuation
                    allowance is recognized when recovery is uncertain.

              (g) Inventories of Supplies
                  Purchased inventories of supplies are valued at lower of cost (defined as moving average cost) and
                  replacement cost. Contributed inventories of supplies are recorded at fair value when such value
                  can reasonably be determined.

              (h) Tangible Capital Assets
                  Tangible capital assets are recorded at cost less accumulated amortization, which includes amounts
                  that are directly related to the acquisition, design, construction, development, improvement, or
                  betterment of the assets. Cost includes overhead directly attributable to construction and
                  development as well as interest costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition or construction
                  of the asset, and asset retirement cost. Costs incurred by Alberta Infrastructure (AI) to construct
                  tangible capital assets on behalf of AHS are recorded by AHS as work in progress as AI incurs
                  costs.

                    Contributed tangible capital assets from non-related entities are recognized at their fair value at the
                    date of the contribution when fair value can be reasonably determined. When AHS cannot determine
                    the fair value, it records such contributions at nominal value.

                    The costs less residual values of tangible capital assets, excluding land, are amortized over their
                    estimated useful lives on a straight-line basis as follows:
                                                                                    Useful Life
                         Facilities and improvements                                10-70 years
                         Equipment                                                  3-20 years
                         Information systems                                        3-15 years
                         Building service equipment                                 5-40 years
                         Land improvements                                          5-40 years

                    Work in progress, which includes facility and improvement projects and development of information
                    systems, is not amortized until after a project is substantially complete and the tangible capital assets
                    are available for use.

                    Leases of tangible capital assets which transfer substantially all benefits and risks of ownership to
                    AHS are accounted for as leased tangible capital assets and leasehold improvements and are
                    amortized over the shorter of the term of the lease or their estimated useful lives. Obligations under
                    capital leases are recorded at the present value of the minimum lease payments excluding executory
                    costs (e.g. insurance, maintenance costs, etc.). The discount rate used to determine the present
                    value of the lease payments is the lower of AHS’ rate for incremental borrowing and the interest rate
                    implicit in the lease.

                    Tangible capital assets are written down to their net recoverable amount when conditions indicate
                    that they no longer contribute to AHS’ ability to provide goods and services or when the value of
                    future economic benefits associated with the tangible capital assets are less than their net book
                    value. Write-downs are recorded as part of amortization and loss on disposals / write-downs of
                    tangible capital assets.

                    Intangibles and other assets inherited by right and that have not been purchased are not
                    recognized in these consolidated financial statements. Similarly, works of art, historical treasures,
                    and collections are not recognized as tangible capital assets.




88                                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                  Financial Information



   Note 2     Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

             (i)   Employee Future Benefits
                   (i) Defined Benefit Pension Plans

                       Local Authorities Pension Plan (LAPP) and Management Employees Pension Plan
                       (MEPP)

                       AHS participates in the LAPP and MEPP, both of which are multi-employer registered defined
                       benefit pension plans. AHS accounts for these plans on a defined contribution basis.
                       Accordingly, the pension expense recorded for these plans in the consolidated financial
                       statements is comprised of the employer contributions that AHS is required to pay for
                       participating employees during the fiscal year. LAPP and MEPP set the employer contribution
                       rates on an annual basis based on actuarially pre-determined amounts that are expected to
                       provide the plans’ future benefit obligations.

                       Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan (SERP)

                       The SERP covers certain employees and supplements the benefits under AHS’ registered
                       plans that are limited by the Income Tax Act (Canada). The SERP has been closed to new
                       entrants since April 1, 2009. The SERP provides future pension benefits to participants based
                       on years of service and earnings.

                       As required under the Income Tax Act (Canada), approximately half of the assets are held in a
                       non-interest bearing Refundable Tax Account with the Canada Revenue Agency. The
                       remaining assets of the SERP are invested in a combination of Canadian equities and Canadian
                       fixed income securities.

                   (ii) Defined Contribution Pension Plans

                       Group Registered Retirement Savings Plans (GRRSPs)

                       AHS sponsors GRRSPs for certain employee groups. Under the GRRSPs, AHS matches a
                       certain percentage of any contribution made by plan participants up to certain limits. AHS also
                       sponsors a defined contribution pension plan for certain employee groups where the employee
                       and employer each contribute specified percentages of pensionable earnings.

                       Supplemental Pension Plan (SPP)

                       Subsequent to April 1, 2009, staff that would have otherwise been eligible for SERP have been
                       enrolled in a defined contribution SPP. The SPP supplements the benefits under AHS
                       registered plans that are limited by the Income Tax Act (Canada). AHS contributes a percentage
                       of an eligible employee’s pensionable earnings, in excess of the limits of the Income Tax Act
                       (Canada). The SPP provides participants with an account balance at retirement based on the
                       contributions made to the plan and investment income earned on the contributions based on
                       investment decisions made by the participant.

                   (iii) Other Benefit Plans

                       Accumulating Non-Vesting Sick Leave

                       Sick leave benefits accumulate with employees’ service and are provided by AHS to certain
                       employee groups, as defined by employment agreements, to cover illness related absences
                       that are outside of short-term and long-term disability coverage. Benefit amounts are
                       determined and accumulate with reference to employees’ earnings at the time they are paid
                       out. The cost of the accumulating non-vesting sick leave benefits is expensed as the benefits
                       are earned.

                       AHS recognizes a liability and expense for accumulating non-vesting sick leave benefits using
                       an actuarial cost method as the employees render services to earn the benefits. The liability
                       and expense is determined using the projected benefit method pro-rated for service and
                       management’s best estimates of expected discount rate, inflation, rate of compensation
                       increase, termination and retirement dates, sick leave accumulation and utilization, and
                       mortality. Actuarial gains and losses are amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected
                       average remaining service life of the related employee groups.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                    89
Financial Information



     Note 2 Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

                        AHS does not record a liability for sick leave benefits that do not accumulate beyond the current
                        reporting year as these are renewed annually.

                        Other Benefits

                        AHS provides its employees with basic life, accidental death and dismemberment, short-term
                        disability, long-term disability, extended health, dental, and vision benefits through benefits
                        carriers. AHS fully accrues its obligations for employee non-pension future benefits.

              (j)   Asset Retirement Obligations
                    Asset retirement obligations are legal obligations associated with the retirement of tangible capital
                    assets. A liability for an asset retirement obligation is recognized when, as at the financial reporting
                    date:

                        (i)     there is a legal obligation to incur retirement costs in relation to a tangible capital asset;
                        (ii)    the past transaction or event giving rise to the liability has occurred;
                        (iii)   it is expected that future economic benefits will be given up; and
                        (iv)    a reasonable estimate of the amount can be made.

                    Asset retirement obligations are initially measured as of the date the legal obligation was incurred,
                    based on management’s best estimate of the amount required to retire tangible capital assets.

                    When a liability for asset retirement obligation is recognized, asset retirement costs related to
                    recognized tangible capital assets in productive use are capitalized by increasing the carrying
                    amount of the related asset and are amortized on a straight- line basis over the estimated useful life
                    of the underlying tangible capital asset (Note 2(h)). Asset retirement costs related to unrecognized
                    tangible capital assets and those not in productive use are expensed. Revisions in estimates are
                    recognized as a change to both the liability and related tangible capital asset in the Consolidated
                    Statement of Financial Position.

              (k) Foreign Currency Translation
                  Transaction amounts denominated in foreign currencies are translated into their Canadian dollar
                  equivalents at exchange rates prevailing at the transaction dates. Carrying values of monetary
                  assets and liabilities and non-monetary items denominated in foreign currencies included in the fair
                  value category reflect the exchange rates at the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position date.
                  Unrealized foreign exchange gains and losses are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of
                  Remeasurement Gains and Losses.

                    In the year of settlement, foreign exchange gains and losses are reclassified to the Consolidated
                    Statement of Operations, and the cumulative amount of remeasurement gains and losses are
                    reversed in the Consolidated Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses.

              (l)   Reserves
                    Certain amounts, as approved by the Official Administrator, may be set aside in accumulated surplus
                    for use by AHS for future purposes. Transfers to, or from, are recorded to the respective reserve
                    account when approved. Reserves include Invested in Tangible Capital Assets and Internally
                    Restricted Surplus for Insurance Equity Requirements, Foundations and Health Benefit Trust of
                    Alberta.

              (m) Measurement Uncertainty
                  The consolidated financial statements, by their nature, contain estimates and are subject to
                  measurement uncertainty. Measurement uncertainty exists when there is a difference between the
                  recognized or disclosed amount and another reasonably possible amount. These estimates and
                  assumptions are reviewed at least annually. Actual results could differ from the estimates
                  determined by management in these consolidated financial statements, and these differences
                  could require adjustment in subsequent reporting years.




90                                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                    Financial Information




   Note 2     Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

                  Measurement uncertainty exists in the fair values reported for portfolio investments designated to
                  the fair value hierarchy (see Note 11). The fair values of these investments are based on estimates.
                  Estimated fair values may not reflect amounts that could be recognized upon immediate sale or
                  amounts that ultimately may be recognized.

                  The amount recorded for amortization of tangible capital assets is based on the estimated useful life
                  of the related assets while the recognition of expended deferred capital revenue depends on when
                  the terms for the use of the funding are met and, when applicable, AHS complies with its
                  communicated use of the funding. The amounts recorded for accumulating non-vesting sick leave
                  are based on various assumptions including the estimated service life of employees, drawdown rate
                  of sick leave banks and rate of salary escalation. The establishment of the provision for unpaid
                  claims relies on judgment and estimates including historical precedent and trends, prevailing legal,
                  economic, social, and regulatory trends; and expectation as to future developments.

                  There is measurement uncertainty related to asset retirement obligations as it involves estimates in
                  determining settlement amount and timing of settlement. Changes to any of these estimates and
                  assumptions may result in change to the obligation.

             (n) Future Accounting Changes

                  On April 1, 2026, AHS will adopt the following new conceptual framework and accounting standard
                  approved by the Public Sector Accounting Board:

                       •   The Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting in the Public Sector
                           The Conceptual Framework is the foundation for public sector financial reporting standard
                           setting. It replaces the conceptual aspects of Section PS 1000 Financial Statement
                           Concepts and Section PS 1100 Financial Statement Objectives. The conceptual
                           framework highlights considerations fundamental for the consistent application of
                           accounting issues in the absence of specific standards.

                       •   PS 1202 Financial Statement Presentation
                           Section PS 1202 sets out general and specific requirements for the presentation of
                           information in general purpose financial statements. The financial statement presentation
                           principles are based on the concepts within the Conceptual Framework.

                  Management is currently assessing the impact of the conceptual framework and the standard on
                  the AHS consolidated financial statements.


   Note 3     Restructuring

         In accordance with the Government of Alberta’s ministerial orders related to the restructuring of AHS, all
         responsibilities, the oversight and coordination of the delivery of mental health and addiction services, along
         with certain related assets, liabilities and funding agreements, were transferred from AHS to provincial
         health agency Recovery Alberta effective September 1, 2024. Similarly, effective February 1, 2025, AHS
         transferred all responsibilities, the oversight and coordination of the delivery of primary care services, along
         with certain related assets, liabilities and funding agreements to the provincial health agency PCA. AHS,
         Recovery Alberta, and PCA are accountable to their respective Ministries within Government of Alberta.
         AHS did not provide or receive any compensation related to this transfer.

         The two remaining provincial health agencies for the acute care and continuing care sectors will become
         operational after March 31, 2025 (Note 30).




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                       91
       Financial Information




            Note 3     Restructuring (continued)

                (a) Assets and liabilities
                Assets and liabilities were transferred based on a methodology approved by the Minister of Health, which
                involved transferring an integrated set of assets and liabilities that support mental health and addictions
                operations for Recovery Alberta and primary care operations for PCA. AHS has signed agreements with
                Recovery Alberta and PCA for the transfer of these assets and liabilities. AHS is providing cash
                management services, including investment and portfolio oversight, therefore cash-settled assets and
                liabilities are shown in the 'Net due from AHS' line below.

                The assets and liabilities were transferred at their carrying amounts as follows:


                                                           Recovery Alberta        Primary Care Alberta
                                                           September 1, 2024         February 1, 2025(i)           Total
Financial assets:
 Cash and cash equivalents                            $                    27     $                 53,257    $        53,284
 Portfolio investments                                                      -                        2,574              2,574
 Accounts receivable                                                    8,830                        2,662             11,492
 Net due from AHS                                                     190,825                       23,269            214,094
                                                                      199,682                       81,762            281,444

Liabilities:
 Accounts payable and accrued liabilities                              75,227                       24,356             99,583
 Employee future benefits                                              64,718                        9,058             73,776
 Unexpended deferred operating revenue                                 66,786                       58,174            124,960
                                                                      206,731                       91,588            298,319

NET DEBT                                                               (7,049)                      (9,826)           (16,875)



Non-financial assets:
 Tangible capital assets(ii)                                             4,738                          62              4,800
 Prepaid expenses, deposits, and other non-
  financial assets                                                       5,278                      11,903             17,181
                                                                        10,016                      11,965             21,981

NET ASSETS BEFORE EXPENDED DEFERRED
CAPITAL REVENUE                                                          2,967                       2,139              5,106

Expended deferred capital revenue                                        2,288                          57              2,345

Net effect of restructuring                           $                    679              $        2,082        $     2,761


                (i)    PCA amounts include 50% ownership in the PCN partnership with physician groups which includes total
                       financial assets of $57,238, liabilities of $68,189 and non-financial assets of $10,951.
                (ii)   The tangible capital assets transferred to Recovery Alberta and PCA include vehicle leases and
                       equipment with a net book value of $4,738 (cost of $18,203 and accumulated amortization of $13,465)
                       and $62 (cost of $1,281 and accumulated amortization of $1,219) respectively. No real property was
                       transferred to Recovery Alberta or PCA as the properties will be transferring to Alberta Infrastructure
                       effective April 1, 2025 (Note 30).

       The restructuring-related costs incurred were attributable to severance costs and were recognized as salaries and
       benefits expense in the statement of operations. The financial impact of these costs was insignificant.



       92                                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                Financial Information




   Note 3     Restructuring (continued)

              The related sector contractual obligations were also transferred to Recovery Alberta and PCA.
              Contracts transferred to Recovery Alberta amounting to $262,703 were related to the continuum of
              mental health and addiction services and supports, from prevention and intervention to treatment and
              recovery. Contracts transferred to PCA amounted to $23,635 mainly related to midwifery services.

              Recovery Alberta and PCA have each signed a Transition Services Framework Agreement and a
              Cooperation Agreement with AHS. Together, these agreements will govern the relationship between
              AHS and the two provincial health agencies throughout the transition. Under the Transition Services
              Framework Agreement, AHS provides clinical and corporate support services including but not limited
              to nutrition, food, linen & environmental services, capital management, information technology,
              protective services, pharmacy services, human resources, financial operations, APL services, and
              health information management.

         (b) Revenue and expenses

             The revenues and expenses for mental health and addictions and primary care operations, included in
             the Statement of Operations before transferring responsibilities to Recovery Alberta on September 1,
             2024, and PCA on February 1, 2025, are as follows:

                                                                                          Mental health
                                               Mental health                             and addictions        Primary care
                                              and addictions         Primary care          12 months            12 months
                                              5 months ended       10 months ended           ended                ended
                                              August 31, 2024      January 31, 2025      March 31, 2024       March 31, 2024
 Revenues:
  Alberta Health transfers
    Base operating                           $               -     $          92,872     $        990,104     $         106,437
    Other operating                                        284               106,560                1,055               124,735
    Recognition of expended deferred
 capital revenue                                           115                      1                 281                     2
  Other government transfers                           470,863                  7,244             108,962                 8,131
  Fees and charges                                       1,397                  3,546               5,805                 4,040
  Donations and non-government
   contributions                                         2,010                     3                5,318                     -
  Investment and other income                            7,594                 4,460               16,468                 8,312
 TOTAL REVENUES                                        482,263               214,686            1,127,993               251,657

 Expenses by function:
  Continuing care                                        1,818                     -                4,351                     -
  Community care                                       275,973               202,252              634,581               236,868
  Acute care                                           170,067                 3,794              389,392                 4,469
  Diagnostic and therapeutic services                   31,849                 1,304               72,498                 1,417
  Population and public health                           2,194                   269                5,963                   406
  Research and education                                 1,026                     -                2,547                     -
  Information technology                                   283                    65                  511                     -
  Support services                                       5,687                 1,567               12,945                 1,568
  Administration                                         2,945                 7,503                5,205                 6,929
 TOTAL EXPENSES                                        491,842               216,754            1,127,993               251,657

 NET OPERATING DEFICIT                                  (9,579)               (2,068)                    -                    -




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                  93
       Financial Information




       Note 3        Restructuring (continued)

                                                                                       Mental health
                                      Mental health and                               and addictions        Primary care
                                         addictions              Primary care           12 months            12 months
                                       5 months ended          10 months ended            ended                ended
                                       August 31, 2024         January 31, 2025       March 31, 2024       March 31, 2024
Expenses by object:
 Salaries and benefits                    $       376,717     $          167,931        $     856,453      $        188,441
 Contracts with health service
 providers                                          97,858                 25,892             226,283                29,092
 Drugs and gases                                     5,346                     91              11,919                   167
 Medical supplies                                      938                    172               1,751                   175
 Other contracted services                           4,155                  1,907              14,196                 1,808
 Other                                               6,520                 20,745              15,842                31,963
 Amortization and loss on
 disposals/write-downs of tangible
 capital assets                                       308                     16                1,549                    11
                                                  491,842                216,754            1,127,993               251,657

       Note 4        Budget

                     The 2024-25 original annual budget was approved by the former AHS Board on March 28, 2024 for
                     submission to the Minister who approved it on June 24, 2024. The restated annual budget, resulting
                     from the restructuring of AHS (Note 1) was approved by the former AHS Board on January 27, 2025
                     and submitted to the Minister. A reconciliation from the original to the restated annual budget has been
                     provided in the Consolidated Schedule of the Revised Budget (Schedule 4).

       Note 5        Other Government Transfers

                                                                                      Budget                                 2024
                                                                                                           2025
                                                                                      (Note 4)                             (Note 29)
                     Recognition of expended deferred capital revenue (Note       $      234,200     $         222,678   $    216,354
                     18)
                     Restricted operating (Note 16(a))                                   255,338               234,567            282,222
                     Unrestricted operating                                            1,162,638               453,539             60,315
                                                                                  $    1,652,176     $         910,784   $        558,891

                       Other government transfers include $897,739 (2024 – $523,929) (Note 25) transferred from the
                       Province of Alberta, $13,045 (2024 – $34,962) from government entities outside the Province of
                       Alberta and exclude amounts from AH as these amounts are separately disclosed on the Consolidated
                       Statement of Operations.

       Note 6        Donations and Non-Government Contributions

                                                                                      Budget
                                                                                                           2025                  2024
                                                                                      (Note 4)
                     Recognition of expended deferred capital revenue (Note       $       33,500     $          32,995   $         34,252
                     18)
                     Restricted operating (Note 16(a))                                   136,200               147,036            139,182
                     Unrestricted operating                                                1,200                18,732             12,167
                     Endowment contributions (Note 23)                                         -                 4,647             27,781
                                                                                  $      170,900     $         203,410   $        213,382




       94                                                                                     Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                           Financial Information



Note 7        Investment and Other Income

                                                                            Budget
                                                                                                       2025                    2024
                                                                            (Note 4)
                 Investment income                                        $     78,600        $            176,531     $        118,227
                 Other income:
                    AH                                                             10,525                   24,976               11,507
                    Other Province of Alberta Ministries (Note 25)                 26,000                  184,252               29,791
                    Other (i)                                                     133,575                  164,451              170,851
                                                                          $       248,700     $            550,210     $        330,376

                 (i) Other mainly relates to recoveries for services provided to third parties.


Note 8        Support Services

                                                                                  Budget
                                                                                                            2025                    2024
                                                                                  (Note 4)
                 Facilities operations                                        $     1,104,300      $          980,945      $        1,070,364
                 Patient health records, food services, and                           517,100                 516,153
                 transportation                                                                                                       513,793
                 Housekeeping, laundry, and linen                                      258,300                265,727                 264,093
                 Materials management                                                  253,000                214,042                 233,350
                 Support services expense of full-spectrum contracted
                 health
                   service providers                                                    179,500               200,641                 182,462
                 Ancillary operations                                                    63,100                60,676                  61,412
                 Fundraising expenses and grants awarded                                 53,800                62,085                  53,310
                 Other (i)                                                              284,700               464,473                 419,588
                                                                              $       2,713,800    $        2,764,742      $        2,798,372

                 (i) Other includes valuation adjustments of $588 (2024 – $78,997). The prior year valuation adjustment

                 was due to reduced demand for inventories purchased to support public health emergencies in
                 previous years (Note 22).

Note 9        Administration

                                                                                    Budget
                                                                                                             2025               2024
                                                                                    (Note 4)
                 General administration                                           $    259,900         $     261,283       $        276,775
                 Human resources                                                       154,500               154,777                143,236
                 Finance                                                                85,900                80,472                 80,422
                 Communications                                                         26,300                26,307                 28,038
                 Administration expense of full-spectrum contracted
                 health
                  service providers                                                       38,300              53,475                 45,339
                                                                                  $      564,900       $     576,314       $        573,810

Note 10       Financial Risk Management

              AHS is exposed to a variety of financial risks associated with its financial instruments. These financial
              risks include market risk, credit risk, and liquidity risk.

             (a) Market Risk

                  Market risk is the risk that the fair value or future cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate
                  due to changes in market prices. Market risk is comprised of three types of risk: price risk, interest
                  rate risk, and foreign currency risk.

                  In accordance with the AHS investment bylaw and policy, AHS manages market risk by maintaining
                  a conservative and diversified portfolio, and engages Alberta Investment Management Corporation,
                  a related party, to manage the portfolio. Compliance with the bylaw and policy is monitored and
                  reported to the Official Administrator on a quarterly basis.



Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                               95
Financial Information



Note 10       Financial Risk Management (continued)

              In order to earn financial returns at an acceptable level of market risk, the consolidated investment
              portfolio is governed by investment bylaws and policies with clearly established target asset mixes. The
              target assets range between 0% to 100% for cash and money market securities, 0% to 80% for fixed
              income securities and 0% to 70% for equity holdings.

              Risk is reduced through asset class diversification, diversification within each asset class, and portfolio
              quality constraints governing the quality of portfolio holdings.

              AHS assesses the sensitivity of its portfolio to market risk based on historical volatility of equity and
              fixed income markets. Volatility is determined using a ten-year average based on fixed income and
              equity market fluctuations and is applied to the total portfolio. Based on the volatility average of 3.72%
              (2024 – 3.70%) increase or decrease, with all other variables held constant, the portfolio could expect
              an increase or decrease in unrealized net gains and losses of $99,607 (2024 – $95,745).

                   (i) Price Risk

                        Price risk relates to the possibility that equity portfolio investments will change in fair value due
                        to future fluctuations in market prices caused by factors specific to an individual equity
                        investment or other factors affecting all equities traded in the market. AHS is exposed to price
                        risk associated with the underlying equity
                        portfolio investments held in pooled funds. If equity market indices (S&P/TSX, S&P1500 and
                        MSCI ACWI and their sectors) declined by 10%, and all other variables are held constant, the
                        potential loss in fair value to AHS would be approximately $54,607 or 2.02% of total portfolio
                        investments (2024 – $53,723 or 2.06%).

                   (ii) Interest Rate Risk

                        Interest rate risk is the risk that the value of a financial instrument might be adversely affected
                        by a change in market interest rates. AHS manages the interest rate risk exposure of its fixed
                        income securities by management of average duration and laddered maturity dates.

                        AHS is exposed to interest rate risk through its investments in fixed income securities with both
                        fixed and floating interest rates. AHS has fixed interest rate loans for all debt, thereby mitigating
                        interest rate risk from rate fluctuations over the term of the outstanding debt. The fair value of
                        fixed rate debt fluctuates with changes in market interest rates but the related future cash flows
                        will not change.

                        In general, investment returns for fixed income securities are sensitive to changes in the level
                        of interest rates, with longer term interest bearing securities being more sensitive to interest
                        rate changes than shorter term bonds and money market instruments.

                        A 1% change in market yield relating to fixed income securities would have increased or
                        decreased fair value by approximately $72,416 (2024 – $62,499).

                        Interest bearing securities have the following average maturity structure:

                                                                      2025                               2024
                         Less than one year                           31%                                33%
                         1 – 5 years                                  49%                                49%
                         6 – 10 years                                 13%                                10%
                         Over 10 years                                 7%                                 8%

                                                                         Average Effective Market Yield
                         Asset Class                                  2025                         2024
                         Money market instruments                    2.81%                        5.06%
                         Fixed income securities                     3.13%                        4.41%




96                                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                         Financial Information



Note 10       Financial Risk Management (continued)

                    (i)   Foreign Currency Risk

                          Foreign currency risk is the risk that the fair value of future cash flows of a financial instrument
                          will fluctuate because of changes in foreign exchange rates. Cash and cash equivalents and
                          portfolio investments denominated in foreign currencies are translated into Canadian dollars
                          on a daily basis using the reporting date exchange rate. Both the realized gain/loss and
                          remeasurement gain/loss comprise actual gains or losses on the underlying instrument as well
                          as changes in foreign exchange rates at the time of the valuation. AHS is exposed to foreign
                          exchange fluctuations on its cash denominated in foreign currencies. AHS is also exposed to
                          changes in the valuation on its global equity funds attributable to fluctuations in foreign
                          currency.

                          Foreign currency risk is managed by the investment policies which limit non-Canadian equities
                          to a maximum of 10% to 45% of the total investment portfolio, depending on the policy. At
                          March 31, 2025, investments in non-Canadian equities represented 12.9% (2024 – 11.6%) of
                          total portfolio investments.

                          Foreign exchange fluctuations on cash balances are mitigated by derivatives and holding
                          minimal foreign currency cash balances. AHS holds US dollar forward contracts to manage
                          currency fluctuations relating to its US dollar accounts payable requirements. As at March 31,
                          2025, AHS held derivatives in the form of forward contracts for future settlement of $22,000
                          (2024 – $18,000). The fair value of these forward contracts as at March 31, 2025 was $1,139
                          (2024 – $434) and is included in portfolio investments (Note 11).

          (b) Credit Risk

              Credit risk is the risk of loss arising from the failure of a counterparty to fully honour its contractual
              obligations. The credit quality of financial assets is generally assessed by reference to external credit
              ratings. Credit risk can also lead to losses when issuers and debtors are downgraded by credit rating
              agencies. The investment policies restrict the types and proportions of eligible investments, thus
              mitigating AHS’ exposure to credit risk.

              Accounts receivable primarily consists of amounts receivable from AH, other Alberta government
              reporting entities, patients, other provinces and territories, and the federal government. AHS periodically
              reviews the collectability of its accounts receivable and establishes an allowance based on its best
              estimate of potentially uncollectible amounts.

              The carrying amounts of financial assets represent the maximum credit exposure.

              Under the investment bylaws and policies governing the consolidated investment portfolio, money
              market securities are limited to a rating of R1 or equivalent or higher, and no more than 10% may be
              invested in any one issuer unless guaranteed by the Government of Canada or a Canadian province.
              Investments in corporate bonds are limited to BBB or equivalent rated bonds or higher and no more
              than 40% of the total investment portfolio. Not more than 20% of the investment portfolio may be BBB
              or equivalent rated bonds. AHS holds unrated mortgage fund investments which are classified as part
              of AHS’ fixed income securities.

              The following table summarizes AHS’ investment in debt securities by counterparty credit rating at
              March 31.
              The unrated securities consist of low volatility pooled mortgages that are not rated on an active market.

                 Credit Rating                                      2025                           2024
                 AAA                                                56%                            58%
                 AA                                                 15%                            10%
                 A                                                  14%                            17%
                 BBB                                                11%                            11%
                 Unrated                                             4%                             4%
                                                                    100%                           100%




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                            97
Financial Information



Note 10        Financial Risk Management (continued)

           (a) Liquidity Risk

               Liquidity risk is the risk that AHS will encounter difficulty under both normal and stressed conditions in
               meeting obligations associated with financial liabilities that are settled by delivery of cash and cash
               equivalents or another financial asset. Liquidity requirements of AHS are met through funding provided
               by AH, income generated from portfolio investments, and by investing in liquid assets, such as money
               market securities, fixed income securities and equities traded in an active market that are easily sold
               and converted to cash. Short-term borrowing to meet financial obligations would be available through
               established credit facilities, which have not been drawn upon, as described in Note 19(b).

               AHS issued debentures and the committed repayments with respect to these debentures are described
               in Note 19(c). The following are contractual maturities of the remaining financial liabilities as at March
               31, 2025, based on expected undiscounted cash flows.

                                               Due in less than 1 year          Due in 1-5 years         Due after 5 years
                 Payroll payable and
                related accrued liabilities     $             1,326,452     $                      -    $                      -
                 Trade accounts payable
                and accrued liabilities                         979,321                          -                             -
                 Other liabilities                                6,873                     13,323                         4,413
                                                $             2,312,646     $               13,323      $                  4,413

Note 11        Portfolio Investments

                                                                         2025                               2024
                                                               Fair Value           Cost      Fair Value                Cost
             Cash held for investing purposes                 $      89,207 $        89,207 $     131,690 $              131,690

             Interest bearing securities:
               Money market securities                                597,429        595,809         614,641              614,636
               Fixed income securities                              1,444,907      1,438,535       1,304,133            1,326,783
                                                                    2,042,336      2,034,344       1,918,774            1,941,419
             Equities:
              Canadian equity investments and funds                  162,401         147,878           199,709            181,927
              Global equity investments and funds                    344,898         302,168           299,807            224,040
                                                                     507,299         450,046           499,516            405,967

              Real estate pooled funds                                38,777          31,069            37,712             30,926

                                                              $ 2,677,619 $        2,604,666 $     2,587,692 $          2,510,002

                                                                                 2025                            2024
             Items at fair value
               Portfolio investments designated to the fair value
                category                                               $            2,683,197      $                    2,509,350
               Portfolio investments in equity instruments that
                are quoted in an active market                                               -                             77,908
               Derivative (liability) asset, net                                       (5,578)                                434
                                                                       $            2,677,619      $                    2,587,692

          As at March 31, 2025, included in portfolio investments is $186,071 (2024 – $188,142) that is restricted for
          use as per the requirements in Sections 99 and 100 of the Insurance Act (Alberta). Endowment principal
          included in portfolio investments amounts to $109,920 (2024 – $105,273) (Note 23).




98                                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                        Financial Information



Note 11       Portfolio Investments (continued)

          The following are the total net remeasurement gains on portfolio investments:

                                                                                          2025                       2024
            Accumulated remeasurement gains                                      $               69,702     $            64,073
            Restricted unrealized net gains attributable to unexpended
             deferred operating revenue (Note 16(b))                                              3,251                   13,617
                                                                                 $               72,953     $             77,690


              Fair Value Hierarchy

              The relative reliability of data or inputs used to measure the fair value is determined based on the
              following fair value hierarchy:

                   •   Level 1 – Unadjusted quoted market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities;
                   •   Level 2 – Observable or corroborated inputs, other than level 1, such as quoted prices for
                       similar assets or liabilities in inactive markets or market data for substantially the full term of the
                       assets or liabilities; and
                   •   Level 3 – Unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and that are
                       significant to the fair value of the assets and liabilities.

                                                                                        2025
                                                         Level 1               Level 2                Level 3              Total
            Cash held for investing purposes        $                -   $          89,207 $                     -    $      89,207
            Interest bearing securities:
              Money market securities                                -              597,429                     -            597,429
              Fixed income securities                                -            1,386,625                58,282          1,444,907
            Equities:
              Canadian equity investments                            -               162,401                     -           162,401
               and funds
              Global equity investments and
               funds                                                 -              344,898                     -            344,898
            Real estate pooled funds                                 -                    -                38,777             38,777
                                                    $                -   $        2,580,560      $         97,059     $    2,677,619
            Percent of total                                       0%                  96%                    4%               100%

                                                                                       2024
                                                         Level 1               Level 2                Level 3              Total
            Cash held for investing purposes        $                -   $        131,690 $                      -    $     131,690
            Interest bearing securities:
              Money market securities                                -              614,641                     -            614,641
              Fixed income securities                                -            1,252,966                51,167          1,304,133
            Equities:
              Canadian equity investments                     77,908                 121,801                     -           199,709
               and funds
              Global equity investments and
               funds                                               -                299,807                     -            299,807
            Real estate pooled funds                               -                      -                37,712             37,712
                                                    $         77,908     $        2,420,905      $         88,879     $    2,587,692
            Percent of total                                     3%                    94%                    3%               100%




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                            99
Financial Information



Note 11        Portfolio Investments (continued)

              Reconciliation of Investments classified as level 3

                                                                                              2025
                                                                       Fixed income         Real estate
                                                                                                                          Total
                                                                        securities         pooled funds
                 Beginning of year                                   $        51,167     $        37,712          $         88,879
                 Purchases                                                      1,735                   -                     1,735
                 Sales                                                        (1,126)                   -                   (1,126)
                 Realized loss                                                    (27)                  -                       (27)
                 Gain included in the Consolidated Statement
                   of Remeasurement Gains and Losses                            2,012                      922               2,934
                 Transfers in(i)                                                4,521                      143               4,664
                 End of year                                         $         58,282    $              38,777    $         97,059


                                                                                                     2024
                                                                             Fixed income           Real estate
                                                                                                                            Total
                                                                              securities          pooled funds
                 Beginning of year                                         $        51,325        $      48,690       $     100,015
                 Purchases                                                           2,015                      -              2,015
                 Sales                                                               (333)             (11,129)             (11,462)
                 Realized (loss) gain                                                  (21)               1,684                1,663
                 Gain (loss) included in the Consolidated Statement
                   of Remeasurement Gains and Losses                                    595                 (1,533)            (938)
                 Transfers out(i)                                                   (2,414)                       -          (2,414)
                 End of year                                               $        51,167        $         37,712    $      88,879

               (i)   Transfers are attributable to changes in the observability of market data.

Note 12        Accounts Receivable

                                                                               2025                                       2024
                                                                           Allowance
                                                                                                                        Net
                                                             Gross        for Doubtful                Net
                                                                                                                      (Note 29)
                                                                           Accounts
               AH operating transfers receivable           $ 371,315 $                - $             371,315 $              129,549
               Other capital transfers receivable              99,273                 -                99,273                105,534
               Patient accounts receivable                    171,921            45,782               126,139                116,584
               Drugs rebates receivable                       148,516                 -               148,516                105,960
               AH capital transfers receivable                  9,755                 -                 9,755                 20,497
               Other operating transfers receivable           107,073                 -               107,073                 89,050
               Other accounts receivable                      175,817            58,715               117,102                188,351
                                                             1,083,67
                                                           $          $         104,497 $             979,173 $              755,525
                                                                    0

          Accounts receivable are unsecured and non-interest bearing. At March 31, 2024, the total allowance for
          doubtful accounts was $54,010 of which $44,350 related to patient accounts receivable.




100                                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                       Financial Information



Note 13    Contractual Rights

             Contractual rights are rights of AHS to economic resources arising from contracts or agreements that will
             result in both assets and revenues in the future when the terms of those contracts or agreements are met.

             Estimated amounts that will be received or receivable for each of the next five years and thereafter are
             as follows:


              Year ended March 31                 Operating leases        Other contracts(i)                Total

                          2026                $                 2,424    $           297,602       $             300,026
                          2027                                  2,194                133,551                     135,745
                          2028                                  1,974                  8,594                      10,568
                          2029                                  1,283                  7,819                       9,102
                          2030                                  1,100                  7,625                       8,725
                       Thereafter                               1,914                 20,344                      22,258
                     March 31, 2025           $                10,889    $           475,535       $             486,424

                     March 31, 2024           $                13,740    $            70,585       $                84,325

               (i)    Other contracts include the transition services framework agreements with Recovery Alberta and
                      PCA of $410,215 (2024 - $nil) (Note 3(a)).


Note 14        Accounts Payable and Accrued Liabilities

                                                                             2025                           2024
             Payroll payable and related accrued liabilities         $         1,326,452       $                   816,482
             Trade accounts payable and accrued liabilities                      979,321                           692,594
             Provision for unpaid claims(a)                                      158,285                           167,598
             Obligations under capital leases(b)                                 134,122                           142,882
             Other liabilities                                                    35,059                            36,399
                                                                     $         2,633,239       $                 1,855,955

           As at March 31, 2025, accounts payable and accrued liabilities includes payables related to the purchase
           of tangible capital assets of $244,166 (2024 – $237,885). Of these amounts, $9,526 (2024 – $9,166)
           comprise life lease deposits received from tenants of certain AHS’ long term care facilities, and obligations
           under capital leases of $134,122 (2024 – $142,882).

          (a) Provision for unpaid claims is an actuarial estimate of liability claims against AHS. It is influenced by
               factors such as historical trends involving claim payment patterns, loss payments, number of unpaid
               claims, claims severity and claim frequency patterns.

               The provision has been actuarially estimated using the discounted value of claim liabilities using a
               discount rate of 4.18% (2024 – 4.37%).

          (b) Obligations under capital leases include site leases with the University of Calgary, vehicle and
              equipment leases, site leases for ambulance services and a community care service facility.

          The obligations will be settled between 2026 and 2041 and have an implicit interest rate payable ranging
          from 2.53% to 5.41% (2024 – 2.53% to 5.41%).




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                         101
Financial Information



Note 14        Accounts Payable and Accrued Liabilities (continued)

              AHS is committed to making payments for obligations under capital leases as follows:

                             Year ended March 31                             Minimum Contract Payments
                                    2026                           $                    24,336
                                    2027                                                22,344
                                    2028                                                18,458
                                    2029                                                13,550
                                    2030                                                10,707
                                  Thereafter                                            62,928
                                                                                       152,323
                                 Less: interest                                        (18,201)
                                                                   $                   134,122

Note 15       Employee Future Benefits

                                                                             2025                        2024
                Accrued vacation pay                               $                621,598      $              680,804
                Accumulating non-vesting sick leave(a)                              121,192                     137,552
                SERP pension plans                                                      (33)                        183
                                                                   $                742,757      $              818,539

          (a) Accumulating Non-Vesting Sick Leave

              Sick leave benefits are paid by AHS; there are no employee contributions and no assets set aside to
              support the obligation.

                                                                               2025                       2024
                 Funded status – deficit                               $            136,098      $                99,365
                 Unamortized net actuarial (loss) gain                              (14,906)                      38,187
                 Accrued benefit liability                             $            121,192      $               137,552


              Key assumptions used in the determination of the accumulating non-vesting sick leave liability are:

                                                                                    2025                    2024
               Estimated average remaining service life                               13 years                 10 years
               Draw down rate of accumulated non-vesting sick leave bank               24.10%                    18.30%
               Discount rate – beginning of year                                        5.00%                     5.60%
               Discount rate – end of year                                              3.63%                     5.00%
               Rate of compensation increase per year                                 2024-25                   2023-24
                                                                                        2.00%                     2.25%
                                                                                      2025-26                   2024-25
                                                                                        3.00%                     2.00%
                                                                                      2026-27                   2025-26
                                                                                        3.00%                     2.00%
                                                                                    Thereafter                Thereafter
                                                                                        2.75%                     2.75%




102                                                                                   Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                    Financial Information



Note 15       Employee Future Benefits (continued)

          (b) Local Authorities Pension Plan (LAPP)

              (i)     AHS Participation in the LAPP

                      The majority of AHS employees participate in the LAPP. AHS’ employees comprise approximately
                      42% (2024 - 46%) of the total membership in LAPP. AHS is not responsible for future funding of
                      the plan deficit other than through contribution increases. As AHS is exposed to the risk of
                      contribution rate increases, the following disclosure is provided to explain this risk.

                      The LAPP provides for a pension of 1.4% for each year of pensionable service based on the
                      average salary of the highest five consecutive years up to the average Canada Pension Plan’s
                      Year’s Maximum Pensionable Earnings (YMPE), over the same five consecutive year period and
                      2.0% on the excess, subject to the maximum pension benefit limit allowed under the Income Tax
                      Act (Canada). The maximum pensionable service allowable under the plan is 35 years.
              (ii)     LAPP Surplus

                      The LAPP carried out an actuarial valuation as at December 31, 2023 and these results were then
                      extrapolated to December 31, 2024.

                                                                          December 31, 2024       December 31, 2023
                        LAPP net assets available for benefits           $      70,698,830      $         63,337,859
                        LAPP pension obligation                                 51,141,682                48,281,339
                        LAPP surplus                                     $      19,557,148      $         15,056,520

                      The 2025 and 2024 LAPP contribution rates are as follows:

                                     Calendar 2025                                         Calendar 2024
                        Employer                   Employees                    Employer                 Employees
                  8.45% of pensionable        7.45% of pensionable         8.45% of pensionable     7.45% of pensionable
                 earnings up to the YMPE    earnings up to the YMPE          earnings up to the       earnings up to the
                    and 11.65% of the       and 10.65% of the excess       YMPE and 11.65% of       YMPE and 10.65% of
                          excess                                                the excess               the excess


          (c) Pension Expense

                                                                                        2025                       2024
                    Local Authorities Pension Plan                             $           607,841       $           521,199
                    Defined contribution pension plans and group RRSPs                      39,116                    41,331
                    Other pension plans                                                      1,645                      1,727
                                                                               $           648,602       $           564,257




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                     103
Financial Information



Note 16        Unexpended Deferred Operating Revenue

           (a) Changes in the unexpended deferred operating revenue balance are as follows:

                                                                                  2025                                        2024
                                                                                       Donors and
                                                                           Other
                                                                AH                        Non-              Total             Total
                                                                        Government (i)
                                                                                       Government
          Balance, beginning of year                     $      225,768 $    111,259 $     360,895 $         697,922 $         572,628
          Adjustment related to Ministry of Seniors,
          Community, and Social Services(ii)                     (8,034)         8,034              -              -                 -
          Balance, beginning of year                            217,734        119,293        360,895        697,922           572,628
          (reclassified)
          Received or receivable during the year              1,598,305        168,077        164,831      1,931,213          2,016,146
          Unexpended deferred operating revenue
           returned                                                (840)        (1,595)          (739)        (3,174)          (10,322)
          Restricted investment income                             1,567          3,467         26,386        31,420             16,860
          Transferred from unexpended deferred
            capital revenue (iii) (Note 17(a))                     8,288        52,282             480         61,050          105,058
          Transferred due to restructuring (Note
            3(a))                                               (56,687)      (66,513)          (1,760)     (124,960)               -
          Recognized as revenue                              (1,640,502)     (234,567)       (147,036)    (2,022,105)     (1,996,431)
          Miscellaneous other revenue recognized                  (1,567)        (125)        (26,666)       (28,358)        (15,742)
                                                                 126,298        40,319         376,391        543,008         688,197
          Changes in unrealized net gains
            attributable to portfolio investments
            related to endowments and unexpended
            deferred operating revenue                            2,531            190        (13,087)       (10,366)            9,725
          Balance, end of year                    $             128,829 $       40,509 $      363,304 $      532,642 $         697,922

                 (i)     The balance for other government includes $1,626 (2024 – $1,879) of unexpended deferred
                         operating revenue received from government entities outside the Province of Alberta. The
                         remaining balance in other government all relates to the Province of Alberta (Note 25).
                 (ii)    On December 12, 2024, the Premier of Alberta approved the transfer of the continuing care
                         department from the Ministry of Health to the Ministry of Seniors, Community, and Social Services.
                         A reclassification has been made to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended March
                         31, 2024 to reclassify the related continuing care amount from Alberta Health transfers to other
                         government transfers to conform with 2025 presentation.
                 (iii)   The transfer is mainly comprised of restricted capital funding that was used for approved
                         expenditures that did not meet the definition of a tangible capital asset.




104                                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                     Financial Information



Note 16       Unexpended Deferred Operating Revenue (continued)

          (b) The unexpended deferred operating revenue balance at the end of the year is externally restricted for
              the following purposes:

                                                                                      2025                         2024
                                                                                          Donors and
                                                                              Other                                Total
                                                                   AH                        Non-       Total
                                                                            Government                           (Note 29)
                                                                                         Government
            Research and education                           $     6,667    $     1,242 $     270,271 $ 278,180 $ 283,879
            Acute care                                            49,448            331        42,922    92,701    153,666
            Support services                                       6,670          3,410        43,593    53,673     49,658
            Diagnostic and therapeutic services                   28,341          1,507         1,264    31,112     23,086
            Continuing care                                            -         24,356            90    24,446     20,246
            Emergency medical services                            22,341          1,588           348    24,277     21,254
            Administration                                         9,508          1,133           333    10,974       8,436
            Population and public health                           1,638          1,754         3,103     6,495     15,121
            Community care                                           285            106         1,795     2,186    100,059
            Others individually less than $10,000                  2,597          2,739            11     5,347       8,900
                                                                 127,495         38,166       363,730   529,391    684,305
            Unrealized net gain (loss) attributable to
             portfolio investments related to
             endowments and unexpended deferred
             operating revenue (Note 11)                         1,334            2,343         (426)     3,251           13,617
                                                             $ 128,829 $         40,509 $     363,304 $ 532,642 $        697,922


Note 17       Unexpended Deferred Capital Revenue

          (a) Changes in the unexpended deferred capital revenue balance are as follows:

                                                                                    2025                                     2024
                                                                                       Donors and
                                                                            Other
                                                                 AH                       Non-             Total             Total
                                                                         Government(i)
                                                                                       Government
          Balance, beginning of year                     $       110,800 $     2,524 $     100,748 $        214,072 $         177,901
          Received or receivable during the year                 128,930     223,560        82,963          435,453           473,542
          Used for acquisition of land                             (168)           -              -           (168)                 -
          Unexpended deferred capital revenue
           returned                                                     -             -       (6,887)        (6,887)           (3,626)
          Transferred to expended deferred
           capital revenue (Note 18)                             (91,399)     (171,381)      (63,260)      (326,040)         (327,575)
          Transferred to unexpended deferred
           operating revenue(ii) (Note 16(a))                     (8,288)      (52,282)         (480)       (61,050)         (105,058)
          Revenue recognized on settlement of
           asset retirement obligations (Note
           20)                                                     (158)         (945)         (376)         (1,479)           (1,112)
          Balance, end of year                           $       139,717 $       1,476 $     112,708 $      253,901 $         214,072

                   (i)    The balance for other government includes $32 (2024 - $nil) of unexpended deferred capital
                          revenue received from government entities outside the Province of Alberta. The remaining
                          balance in other government all relates to the Province of Alberta (Note 25).
                   (ii)   The transfer is mainly comprised of restricted capital funding of approved expenditures that did
                          not meet the definition of a tangible capital asset.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                       105
Financial Information



Note 17       Unexpended Deferred Capital Revenue (continued)

          (a) The unexpended deferred capital revenue balance at the end of the year is externally restricted for the
              following purposes:

                                                                2025                                              2024
                                                                    Donors and
                                                        Other
                                          AH                           Non-                    Total              Total
                                                      Government
                                                                   Government
                Equipment            $     17,932     $      111   $   110,999             $   129,042       $     105,298
                Information
                  systems                   5,278                  -               -             5,278               2,952
                Facilities and
                  improvements            116,507              1,365           1,709           119,581             105,822
                                     $    139,717     $        1,476         112,708       $   253,901             214,072

Note 18       Expended Deferred Capital Revenue

               Changes in the expended deferred capital revenue balance are as follows:

                                                                                 2025                           2024
                                                                                     Donors and
                                                                          Other
                                                               AH                       Non-        Total       Total
                                                                       Government(i)
                                                                                     Government
          Balance, beginning of year                      $    578,509 $ 7,876,374 $     241,548 $ 8,696,431 $ 8,525,465
          Transferred from unexpended deferred
          capital revenue (Note 17(a))                          91,399         171,381            63,260          326,040      327,575
          Constructed tangible capital assets on
          behalf of AHS                                                -       258,231                   -        258,231      198,774
          Contributed tangible capital assets
                                                                       -               -                 -                -         24
          Transferred to PHA’s due to restructuring
          (Note 3(a))                                           (1,303)          (530)              (512)          (2,345)            -
          Recognized as revenue                               (110,130)      (222,678)           (32,995)        (365,803)    (355,407)
          Balance, end of year
                                                          $    558,475     $ 8,082,778 $         271,301 $ 8,912,554 $ 8,696,431

                (i)   The balance includes $294 (2024 - $228) of expended deferred capital revenue received from
                      government entities outside of the Province of Alberta. The remaining balance in other government
                      relates to the Province of Alberta (Note 25).




106                                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                      Financial Information



Note 19       Debt

                                                                          2025                           2024
             Debentures (a):
               Parkade loan #1                                $                    6,014      $                   9,811
               Parkade loan #2                                                     8,506                         11,658
               Parkade loan #3                                                    15,626                         19,081
               Parkade loan #4                                                    78,885                         88,956
               Parkade loan #5                                                    20,097                         22,331
               Parkade loan #6                                                    16,105                         17,279
               Parkade loan #7                                                    36,452                         38,774
               Parkade loan #8                                                   147,320                        149,397
               Parkade loan #9                                                    19,407                         20,000
               Energy savings initiative loan                                     12,911                         14,887
               EMS support vehicle loan                                           14,264                         23,639
                                                              $                  375,587      $                 415,813

          (a) Alberta Treasury Board and Finance (TBF) is responsible for the administration of the Province’s lending
              program.

              AHS issued debentures to TBF, a related party, to finance the construction of parkades. AHS has
              pledged revenue derived directly or indirectly from the operations of all parking facilities being
              constructed, renovated, owned, and operated by AHS as security for these debentures.

              AHS issued a debenture to TBF relating to an energy savings initiative. AHS has pledged the mortgage
              on the Royal Alexandra Hospital Lands and Alberta Hospital Lands as security for this debenture.

              AHS issued a debenture to TBF relating to EMS support vehicles. AHS has pledged the vehicles as
              security for this debenture.

              AHS is in compliance with all performance requirements relating to its debentures as at March 31, 2025.

              The maturity dates and interest rates for the outstanding debentures are as follows:

                                                                       Maturity Date              Fixed Interest Rate
            Parkade loan #1                                       September 2026                       4.4025%
            Parkade loan #2                                       September 2027                       4.3870%
            Parkade loan #3                                       March 2029                           4.9150%
            Parkade loan #4                                       September 2031                       4.9250%
            Parkade loan #5                                       June 2032                            4.2280%
            Parkade loan #6                                       December 2035                        3.6090%
            Parkade loan #7                                       March 2038                           2.6400%
            Parkade loan #8                                       December 2059                        3.6010%
            Parkade loan #9                                       March 2044                           5.1200%
            Energy savings initiative loan                        December 2030                        2.4160%
            EMS support vehicle loan                              September 2026                       1.1500%

          (b) As at March 31, 2025, AHS has access to a $220,000 (2024 – $220,000) revolving demand facility with
              a Canadian chartered bank which may be used for operating purposes. Draws on the facility bear
              interest at the bank’s prime rate less 0.50% per annum. As at March 31, 2025, AHS has $nil (2024 –
              $nil) drawn against this facility.

              AHS also has access to a $33,000 (2024 – $33,000) revolving demand letter of credit facility which may
              be used to secure AHS’ obligations to third parties. At March 31, 2025, AHS has $3,376 (2024 – $3,316)
              in a letter of credit outstanding against this facility. AHS is in compliance with the terms of the agreement
              relating to the letter of credit as at March 31, 2025.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                        107
Financial Information



Note 19       Debt (continued)

          (c) AHS is committed to making principal and interest payments with respect to its outstanding debt as
              follows:

                 Year Ended March 31                 Principal                 Interest                   Total
                          2026                 $             41,671 $                14,090      $              55,761
                          2027                               36,274                  12,584                     48,858
                          2028                               28,904                  11,236                     40,140
                          2029                               28,302                  10,023                     38,325
                          2030                               25,125                   8,849                     33,974
                        Thereafter                          215,311                  99,432                    314,743
                                               $            375,587 $               156,214      $             531,801

               During the year, the total interest related to debt was $15,334 (2024 – $15,788), comprised of
               capitalized interest of $1,017 (2024 – $nil) (Note 21(a)) and interest expense of $14,317 (2024 –
               $15,788). Accrued interest at March 31, 2025 amounted to $2,520 (2024 – $2,679).


Note 20       Asset Retirement Obligations

                                                                                   2025                    2024
            Asset retirement obligations, beginning of year                $          539,421        $        583,172
            Liability incurred                                                               -                       -
            Liability settled and adjustments                                          (5,214)                 (1,978)
            Revision in estimates (Note 21)                                           101,256                 (41,773)
            Asset retirement obligations, end of year                      $          635,463        $        539,421

           AHS has asset retirement obligations to remove hazardous asbestos fibre containing materials from its
           buildings. Regulations require AHS to handle and dispose of the asbestos in a prescribed manner when it
           is disturbed, such as when the building undergoes renovations or is demolished. Although timing of the
           asbestos removal is conditional on the building undergoing renovations or being demolished, regulations
           create an existing obligation for AHS to remove the asbestos when asset retirement activities occur.

           The estimate of the liability is based primarily on asbestos abatement rates calculated using the current
           costs incurred as part of AHS renovation and demolition projects. Third party engineering reports, building
           schematics, and professional judgments were used in determining the square meters containing asbestos.
           A funding source for this obligation has not been determined.

           The timing of settlement of asset retirement obligations is currently unknown. For the year ended March
           31, 2025, a recovery of $3,983 (2024 - $1,978) was recognized, which includes costs incurred by AI on
           behalf of AHS of $2,504 (2024 - $866) (Note 17(a)).




108                                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                        Financial Information



    Note 21          Tangible Capital Assets


                                                                           Transfers/              Transfer related to         Disposals/
              Cost                      2024           Additions(a)                                                                                  2025
                                                                          Adjustments(i)         restructuring (Note 3)       Write-downs

  Facilities and improvements $         12,983,453 $               - $               218,486 $                          - $               - $        13,201,939
  Work in progress                         661,491           525,550               (379,102)                            -           (8,371)             799,568
  Equipment                              3,139,882           226,922                   (867)                     (19,484)          (98,264)           3,248,189
  Information systems                    2,384,398             8,671                 115,330                            -          (70,509)           2,437,890
  Building service equipment             1,090,744                 -                 134,534                            -                 -           1,225,278
  Land(b)                                  121,781               168                   (960)                            -              (64)             120,925
  Leased facilities and
   improvements                            373,174               453                  2,413                             -             (183)             375,857
  Land improvements                        114,042                 -                 10,462                             -                 -             124,504
                              $         20,868,965 $         761,764 $              100,296 $                    (19,484) $       (177,391) $        21,534,150


                                                                                 Effect of
                                          2024           Amortization                               Transfer related to        Disposals/
   Accumulated Amortization                                                    Transfers/                                                             2025
                                                          Expense                                restructuring (Note 3)       Write-downs
                                                                              Adjustments(i)
 Facilities and improvements        $      5,151,365     $     134,701    $                  -   $                      -     $           -    $      5,286,066
 Work in progress                                  -                 -                       -                          -                 -                   -
 Equipment                                 2,431,494           170,955                       -                   (14,684)          (97,339)           2,490,426
 Information systems                       1,825,309           169,635                       -                          -          (70,300)           1,924,644
 Building service equipment                  675,892            58,671                       -                          -                 -             734,563
 Land(b)                                           -                 -                       -                          -                 -                   -
 Leased facilities and
mprovements                                  234,030            16,170                       -                          -             (143)             250,057
 Land improvements                            83,220             3,907                       -                          -                 -              87,127
                                    $     10,401,310     $     554,039    $                  -   $               (14,684)     $   (167,782)    $     10,772,883



                                                                                           Transfers/             Disposals/
                            Cost                   2023                Additions                                                            2024
                                                                                          Adjustments(i)         Write-downs

           Facilities and improvements         $   12,717,651 $                     - $            267,024 $             (1,222) $            12,983,453
           Work in progress                           665,094                 506,115            (509,307)                 (411)                 661,491
           Equipment                                2,974,510                 207,650               (2,001)             (40,277)               3,139,882
           Information systems                      2,268,704                  14,038              108,723               (7,067)               2,384,398
           Building service equipment               1,025,874                       -               64,883                  (13)               1,090,744
           Land(b)                                    121,749                      32                     -                    -                 121,781
           Leased facilities and
            improvements                              317,743                  33,000                22,431                    -                 373,174
           Land improvements                          107,568                       -                 6,474                    -                 114,042
                                               $   20,198,893 $               760,835 $            (41,773) $           (48,990) $            20,868,965


                                                                      Amortization    Effect of Transfers/        Disposals/
            Accumulated Amortization               2023                                                                                       2024
                                                                       Expense           Adjustments             Write-downs

           Facilities and improvements         $       4,994,290 $            158,195 $                    - $          (1,120) $               5,151,365
           Work in progress                                    -                    -                      -                  -                         -
           Equipment                                   2,298,163              172,250                      -           (38,919)                 2,431,494
           Information systems                         1,682,243              150,060                      -            (6,994)                 1,825,309
           Building service equipment                    626,105               49,801                      -               (14)                   675,892
           Land(b)                                             -                    -                      -                  -                         -
           Leased facilities and
            improvements                                 214,316               19,714                      -                  -                   234,030
           Land improvements                              80,127                3,093                      -                  -                    83,220
                                               $       9,895,244 $            553,113 $                    - $         (47,047)     $          10,401,310

                      (i)    Transfers and adjustments mainly relate to reclassifications between capital asset categories and
                             revisions to asset retirement costs of $101,256 (2024 - $41,773) (Note 20).




    Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                           109
Financial Information



Note 21 Tangible Capital Assets (continued)

                                                                                 Net Book Value
                                                                   2025                                  2024
       Facilities and improvements                   $                        7,915,873 $                          7,832,088
       Work in progress                                                         799,568                              661,491
       Equipment                                                                757,763                              708,388
       Information systems                                                      513,246                              559,089
       Building service equipment                                               490,715                              414,852
       Land(b)                                                                  120,925                              121,781
       Leased facilities and improvements                                       125,800                              139,144
       Land improvements                                                         37,377                               30,822
                                                     $                       10,761,267 $                         10,467,655

          (a) Additions

              Additions include tangible capital assets constructed by AI on behalf of AHS of $258,231 (2024 –
              $198,774) (Note 25) and $nil (2024 – $24) contributed from other sources. During the year, AHS
              capitalized interest of $1,017 (2024 – $nil) (Note 19(c)) within work in progress. Capital lease additions
              amounted to $15,185 (2024 – $37,753).


          (b) Leased Land

              Land at the following sites have been leased to AHS at nominal values:

                                    Site                                     Leased from                    Lease Expiry
                                                                   Banff Mineral Spring Hospital
              Banff Health Unit                                                                         January 2028
                                                                   Association
              Evansburg Community Health Centre                    Yellowhead County                    April 2031
              Bethany Care Centre                                  Red Deer College                     April 2034
              Myrnam Land                                          Eagle Hill Foundation                May 2038
              Helipad Land at Two Hills                            Stella Stefiuk                       August 2041
              McConnell Place North                                City of Edmonton                     September 2044
              Northeast Community Health Centre                    City of Edmonton                     February 2047
              Jasper Healthcare Centre                             Parks Canada                         March 2049
              Foothills Medical Centre Parkade                     University of Calgary                July 2054
              Alberta Children’s Hospital                          University of Calgary                December 2103
              Kaye Edmonton Clinic (Parcel H)                      The University of Alberta            February 2109
              Laneway adjacent to Queen Elizabeth II Hospital      City of Grande Prairie               Under negotiation
              Jasper Residential Property                          Parks Canada                         Under negotiation

          (c) Leased Tangible Capital Assets

              Tangible capital assets acquired through capital leases includes vehicle leases, equipment, information
              systems and facilities with a cost of $594,661 (2024 – $579,537) and accumulated amortization of
              $349,068 (2024 – $286,709).

          (d) Asset Retirement Costs

         Facilities and improvements and Building service equipment, include $639,561 (2024 - $538,304) of asset
         retirement costs and $344,121 (2024 - $359,135) of related accumulated amortization.




110                                                                                    Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                           Financial Information



 Note 22         Inventories of Supplies

                                                                                    2025                            2024
               Pharmaceuticals                                        $                     118,324 $                       106,759
               Medical and surgical supplies                                                 42,830                          47,395
               Other(i)                                                                      28,283                          43,015
                                                                      $                     189,437 $                       197,169

                   (i)   Other is mainly related to staff wearing apparel such as gowns and masks, housekeeping, and
                         other supplies not included under pharmaceuticals and medical and surgical supplies.

             During the year, a valuation adjustment of $588 (2024 – $78,997) was recognized. The prior year’s
             valuation adjustment was due to reduced demand for inventories purchased to support public health
             emergencies in previous years.



 Note 23         Accumulated Surplus

             Accumulated surplus is comprised of the following:

                                                                     2025                                              2024

                                                                                    Internally
                                                                                   Restricted
                                                Invested in
                                                                                   Surplus for
                                 Unrestricted    Tangible
                                                              Endowments(b)     Insurance Equity        Total          Total
                                   Surplus        Capital
                                                                                 Requirements,
                                                 Assets (a)
                                                                                Foundations and
                                                                                     HBTA(c)


Balance, beginning of
  year                       $       379,343 $ 696,347 $          105,273 $            123,495 $       1,304,458 $    1,120,827
Annual operating surplus              71,060              -                 -                      -      71,060        183,631
Net investment in tangible
   capital assets                      6,747       (6,747)                  -                      -            -                    -
Transfer of insurance
   equity requirements,
   foundations and HBTA
   net surplus                     (235,275)              -                 -           235,275                 -                    -
Transfer of net surplus
  related to asset
  retirement obligations             (20,229)      20,229                   -                      -            -                    -
Transfer of endowment
  contributions
  (Note 6)                            (4,647)        -              4,647                     -                 -              -
Balance, end of year         $       196,999 $ 709,829 $          109,920 $            358,770 $       1,375,518 $    1,304,458




 Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                              111
Financial Information



Note 23 Accumulated Surplus (continued)

          (a) Invested in Tangible Capital Assets

              Invested in tangible capital assets represents the portion of accumulated surpluses that has been
              invested in the acquisition or construction of AHS’ assets. The balance is offset by asset retirement
              costs recognized to date in accumulated surplus net of related liability settlements.

              Reconciliation of invested in tangible capital assets:

                                                                                               2025                2024
                Tangible capital assets (Note 21)                                          $   10,761,26     $    10,467,655

                 Net Book Value of Asset Retirement Costs capitalized (Note 21(d))             (295,440)           (179,169)

                 Less funded by:
                   Expended deferred capital revenue (Note 18)                                 (8,912,55          (8,696,431)
                   Debt (Note 19)                                                              (375,587)            (415,813)
                   Unexpended debt                                                                15,814               32,405
                   Obligations under capital leases (Note 14)                                  (134,122)            (142,882)
                   Life lease deposits (Note 14)                                                  (9,526)              (9,166)
                                                                                           $   1,049,852     $      1,056,599
                Asset retirement costs recognized net of related liability settlements         (340,023)            (360,252)
                                                                                           $     709,829     $        696,347


          (b) Endowments

              Endowments represent the portion of accumulated surplus that is restricted and must be maintained in
              perpetuity. Transfers of endowment contributions from unrestricted surplus include $4,647 (2024 –
              $27,781) of net contributions received in the year (Note 6).

          (c) Internally Restricted Surplus for Insurance Equity Requirements and Foundations and HBTA

              Insurance equity requirements comprise surpluses of $17,250 (2024 – $21,042) related to equity of the
              LPIP mainly relating to legislative requirements per the Insurance Act. Foundations comprise surpluses
              amounting to $119,325 (2024 – $102,453) related to donations received by AHS’ Controlled
              Foundations without external restrictions attached. Health Benefit Trust of Alberta (HBTA) comprise
              surpluses of $222,195 ($2024 – $nil) related to equity representing in substance a prepayment of future
              premiums to the HBTA.




112                                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                        Financial Information



Note 24       Contractual Obligations, Contingent Liabilities and Other Matters

          (a) Contractual Obligations

              Contractual obligations are AHS’ obligations to others that will become liabilities in the future when the
              terms of those contracts or agreements are met.

              The estimated aggregate amount payable for the unexpired terms of these contractual obligations are
              as follows:

  Year ended                                                        Operating             Capital
                           Services(i)           Other(ii)                                                     Total
   March 31                                                          Lease                Projects
      2026             $      3,550,457      $        476,012     $      64,410         $   255,715      $      4,346,594
      2027                    1,414,436               213,797            58,579               51,483            1,738,295
      2028                    1,648,488               292,260            50,808               24,999            2,016,555
      2029                    1,090,400                77,159            42,335               21,905            1,231,799
      2030                      955,709                47,522            35,114               13,644            1,051,989
   Thereafter                 6,439,438                51,141           141,681                    -            6,632,260
 March 31, 2025        $     15,098,928      $      1,157,891     $     392,927         $   367,746      $     17,017,492

 March 31, 2024        $     16,056,317      $      1,071,034     $        372,841      $    448,478     $     17,948,670

               (i)  Service obligations mainly relate to contracts with third parties for the provision of long-term care
                    services and home care services.
               (ii) Other obligations mainly relate to contracts with third parties for maintenance, information
                    technology services, software, equipment, and procurement of medical supplies and food.
          (b) Contingent Liabilities

                     (i)   Legal Claims

                           AHS is subject to legal claims during its normal course of business. AHS recognizes a liability
                           when the assessment of a claim indicates that a future event is likely to confirm that a liability
                           has been incurred at the date of the financial statements and the amount of the contingent loss
                           can be reasonably estimated.

                           Accruals have been made in specific instances where it is likely that losses will be incurred
                           based on a reasonable estimate. As at March 31, 2025, accruals have been recorded as part
                           of the provision for unpaid claims and other liabilities (Note 14). Included in this accrual are
                           claims in which AHS has been jointly named with the Minister. The accrual provided for these
                           claims under the provision for unpaid claims represents AHS’ portion of the liability.

                           AHS has been named in 195 legal claims (2024 – 234 claims) related to conditions in existence
                           at March 31, 2025 where the likelihood of the occurrence of a future event confirming a
                           contingent loss is not determinable. Of these, 158 claims have $623,540 in specified amounts
                           and 37 claims have no specified amounts (2024 – 201 claims with $706,650 of specified claims
                           and 33 claims with no specified amounts). The resolution of indeterminable claims may result
                           in a liability, if any, that is different than the claimed amount.

                     (ii) Collective Agreements

                           AHS currently has 18 (2024 – 1) collective agreements that have expired as at March 31,
                           2025. Given that negotiations are ongoing or have not commenced, no additional disclosures
                           have been made.

          (c) Other Matters

                           Management and external parties are currently conducting various investigations into certain
                           procurement practices. These investigations remain ongoing as of the date of the approval of
                           the financial statements. Management is not aware of any material impacts to the
                           presentation of these financial statements as at the date of approval, as these investigations
                           continue.



Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                          113
Financial Information



Note 25       Related Parties

           Transactions with related parties are included within these consolidated financial statements, unless
           otherwise stated.

           The Minister appoints the Official Administrator. The viability of AHS’ operations depends on transfers from
           AH. Transactions between AHS and AH are reported and disclosed in the Consolidated Statement of
           Operations, the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, and the Notes to the Consolidated Financial
           Statements, and are therefore excluded from the tables below.

           Related parties also include key management personnel of AHS. AHS has defined key management
           personnel to include those disclosed in Schedules 2A and 2B of these consolidated financial statements,
           except management reporting to CEO direct reports. Related party transactions with key management
           personnel primarily consist of compensation related payments and are undertaken on similar terms and
           conditions to those adopted if the entities were dealing at arm’s length.

           AHS is a related party with respect to those entities consolidated or included on a modified equity basis in
           the consolidated financial statements of the Province of Alberta. Entities consolidated or included on a
           modified equity basis have been grouped with their respective ministry and transactions between AHS and
           the other ministries, except for provincial health agencies which are disclosed separately, are recorded at
           their exchange amount as follows:

                                                             Revenues(a)                            Expenses
                                                                            2024
                                                      2025               (Restated)          2025              2024
                                                                          (Note 29)

          Alberta Advanced Education(b)         $        50,493      $        57,875     $    172,515     $    184,077
          Alberta Infrastructure(c)                     282,607              312,158            9,677           12,064
          Alberta Mental Health and
                                                        483,961              121,779                 -                -
          Addiction(d)
          Other ministries(e)                           106,377               64,122           18,462           31,749
          Provincial Health Agencies(f)                 159,304                    -                -                -
          Total for the year                    $     1,082,742      $       555,934     $    200,654     $    227,890

                                                          Receivable from                          Payable to
                                                                            2024
                                                      2025               (Restated)          2025              2024
                                                                          (Note 29)
          Alberta Advanced Education(b)         $         10,287     $        11,435     $     22,822     $     33,399
          Alberta Infrastructure(c)                       63,950              69,725            1,955            6,144
          Alberta Mental Health and
                                                                -             28,419                 -           1,288
          Addiction(d)
          Other ministries(e)                            87,933               47,928          378,173          419,112
          Provincial Health Agencies(f)                       -                    -          293,694                -
          Balance, end of year                  $       162,170      $       157,507     $    696,644     $    459,943


              (a)   Revenues with Province of Alberta ministries include other government transfers of $897,739
                    (2024 – $523,929), (Note 5), other income of $184,252 (2024 – $29,791) (Note 7), and fees and
                    charges of $751 (2024 – $2,214). A substantial portion of other income is for the provision of
                    corporate and clinical support service provided to the provincial health agencies under the
                    transition services framework agreement.

              (b)   The majority of AHS’ transactions with Alberta Advanced Education relate to initiatives with the
                    University of Alberta and the University of Calgary. These initiatives include teaching, research,
                    and program delivery. A number of physicians are employed by either AHS or the universities but
                    perform services for both. Due to proximity of locations, some initiatives result in sharing physical
                    space and support services. The transactions reported are a result of funding provided from one
                    to the other and recoveries of shared costs.



114                                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                    Financial Information



Note 25       Related Parties (continued)


              (c)   The transactions with AI relate to the construction of tangible capital assets on behalf of AHS.
                    These transactions include operating transfers of $61,424 (2024 – $98,110) and recognition of
                    expended deferred capital revenue of $221,183 (2024 – $214,048) relating to tangible capital
                    assets with stipulations or external restrictions to utilize over their remaining useful lives. Not
                    included in the table above but included in total amounts disclosed in Note 21(a) is tangible capital
                    assets constructed by AI on behalf of AHS of $258,231 (2024 – $198,774).

              (d)   The transactions with Alberta Mental Health and Addiction, up until the operational date of RA,
                    related to initiatives to support Albertans experiencing addiction and mental health challenges.
                    Subsequent to the operational date, it relates to the corporate and clinical support services being
                    provided by AHS.

              (e)   The payable transactions with other ministries include the debt payable to TBF (Note 19(a)).

              (f)   The transactions with provincial health agencies relate to the services provided by AHS in
                    accordance with the transition services agreements. Under the Transition Services Framework
                    Agreement, AHS provides corporate and clinical support services including but not limited to
                    nutrition, food, linen & environmental services, capital management, information technology,
                    protective services, pharmacy services, human resources, financial operations, APL services and
                    health information management.
          At March 31, 2025, AHS has recorded deferred revenue from other ministries within the Province of Alberta,
          excluding AH, of $38,883 (2024 – $117,414) related to unexpended deferred operating revenue (Note
          16(a)), $1,444 (2024 – $2,524) related to unexpended deferred capital revenue (Note 17(a)) and $8,082,484
          (2024 – $7,876,146) related to expended deferred capital revenue (Note 18).


          Contingent liabilities in which AHS has been jointly named with other government entities within the
          Province of Alberta are disclosed in Note 24.

Note 26       Government Partnerships

          AHS has proportionately consolidated 50% of the results of NACTRC and 33.33% of the results in iRSM.
          AHS also proportionately consolidated its 50% ownership interests in PCNs up until February 1, 2025.
          Following the transfer of primary care responsibilities to PCA, effective February 1, 2025, AHS no longer
          holds any ownership interest in PCN’s (Note 2(a)(ii) and Note 3). The following is 100% of the financial
          position and results of operations for AHS’ government partnerships.

                                                                                     2025                   2024
              Financial assets (portfolio investments, accounts
                receivable, other assets)                                     $             1,526   $           83,417
              Liabilities (trade accounts payable, unexpended deferred
                operating revenue)                                                          1,526               83,417
              Accumulated surplus                                             $                 -   $                -

              Total revenues                                                  $         250,700     $          279,160
              Total expenses                                                            250,700                279,160
              Annual surplus                                                  $               -     $                -




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                      115
Financial Information



Note 27       Trusts under Administration

          (a) Health Benefit Trust of Alberta (HBTA)

              AHS is one of more than 30 participants in the HBTA and has a majority representation on the HBTA
              governance board. The HBTA is a formal employee life and health trust established under a Trust
              Agreement effective January 1, 2000. The HBTA provides health and other related employee benefits
              pursuant to the authorizing Trust Agreement.

              The HBTA’s balances as at March 31 are as follows:

                                                                              2025                         2024
                Financial assets                                    $                365,504     $                232,932
                Liabilities                                                              209                       23,983
                Net financial assets                                                 365,295                      208,949
                Non-financial assets                                                       -                            -
                Net assets                                          $                365,295     $                208,949

              AHS has included in prepaid expenses $222,195 (2024 – $142,539) representing in substance a
              prepayment of future premiums to the HBTA. For the fiscal year ended March 31, 2025, AHS paid
              premiums of $692,534 (2024 – $632,746) which is approximately 88% (2024 – 98%) of the total
              premiums received by the HBTA.

          (b) Other Trust Funds

              AHS holds funds in trust for research and development, education, and other programs. These amounts
              are held and administered on behalf of others in accordance with the terms and conditions embodied in
              the relevant agreements with no unilateral power to change the conditions set out in the trust indenture
              (or agreement) and therefore are not reported in these consolidated financial statements. As at March
              31, 2025, the balance of funds held in trust by AHS for research and development is $100 (2024 – $100).

              AHS holds funds in trust from continuing care residents for personal expenses. As at March 31, 2025,
              the balance of these funds is $3,024 (2024 – $2,185). These amounts are not included in the
              consolidated financial statements.

              AHS and a third party trustee administer the SERP in accordance with a retirement compensation
              arrangement trust agreement. As at March 31, 2025, there are $24,255 in plan assets (2024 – $25,176).
              These amounts are not included in the consolidated financial statements.


Note 28       Segment Disclosure

           The Consolidated Schedule of Segment Disclosures – Schedule 3 is intended to enable users to better
           understand the reporting entity and identify the resources allocated to the major activities of AHS.

           AHS’ revenues, as reported on the Consolidated Statement of Operations, are most informatively presented
           by source and are not reasonably assignable to the reportable segments. For each reported segment, the
           expenses are directly or reasonably attributable to the segment.

           The segments have been selected based on the presentation that is adopted for the financial reporting,
           planning and budget processes, and represent the major distinguishable activities of AHS.

           Segments include:

          (a) Continuing care

              Continuing care homes are comprised of Type A (formerly long-term care), Type B (formerly
              designated supportive living), Type C (formerly palliative and hospice care), and psychiatric care in
              facilities operated by AHS and contracted providers.




116                                                                                    Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                     Financial Information



Note 28         Segment Disclosure (continued)

          (b) Community care

                Community care includes Type B (formerly designated supportive living), Type C (formerly palliative
                and hospice care), and community programs including PCN, Family Care Clinics, urgent care centres,
                community paramedic program, and mental health. This segment excludes community-based dialysis,
                oncology, and surgical services.

          (c) Home care

                Home care is comprised of home nursing and support.

          (d) Acute care

                Acute care is comprised predominantly of patient care units such as medical, surgical, intensive care,
                palliative care, obstetrics, pediatrics, mental health, emergency, day/night care, clinics, day surgery,
                and contracted surgical services. This segment also includes operating and recovery rooms.

          (e) Emergency medical services

                Emergency medical services is comprised of ground ambulance, air ambulance, patient transport, and
                central dispatch. AHS also supports community paramedic programs, as well as other programs that
                support the learning, development, quality and safety of emergency medical services professionals.

          (f)   Diagnostic and therapeutic services

                Diagnostic and therapeutic services support and provide care for patients through clinical lab (both in
                the community and acute settings), diagnostic imaging, pharmacy, rehabilitation services such as
                physiotherapy, occupational therapy, respiratory therapy, and speech language pathology.

          (g) Population and public health

                Population and public health is comprised primarily of health promotion, disease and injury prevention,
                and health protection. This segment also includes immunizations, traveler’s health clinics, outbreaks,
                screening programs, and disease surveillance. This segment excludes activities associated with
                treatment of communicable diseases.

          (h) Research and education

                Research and education is comprised primarily of costs pertaining to formally organized health research
                and graduate medical education, primarily funded by donations, and third party contributions.

          (i)   Information technology

                Information technology is comprised of costs pertaining to the provision of service and consultation in
                the design, development, implementation of technology services and systems.

          (j)   Support services

                Support services is comprised of building maintenance operations (including utilities), materials
                management (including purchasing, central warehousing, distribution, and sterilization), housekeeping,
                patient registration, health records, infection control, food services, and emergency preparedness.

          (k) Administration

                Administration is comprised of human resources, finance, communications, and general administration,
                as well as a share of administration of certain contracted health service providers. General
                administration includes senior executives and many functions such as planning and development,
                quality assurance, patient safety, insurance, privacy, public relations, risk management, internal audit,
                and legal.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                      117
Financial Information



Note 29        Corresponding Amounts

          Certain corresponding amounts have been reclassified to conform with 2025 presentation, with the most
          significant reclass pertaining to the transfer of the continuing care department. On December 12, 2024, the
          Premier of Alberta approved the transfer of the continuing care department from the Ministry of Health to the
          Ministry of Seniors, Community and Social Services. As a result, the statement of operations and the
          accounts receivable note for the year ending March 31, 2024, were updated to reflect this change.
          Specifically, $30,966 was reclassified from AH transfers to other government transfers in the statement of
          operations, and $39,000 from AH operating transfers receivable to other operating transfers receivable within
          accounts receivable (Note 12), to align with the 2025 presentation.

Note 30        Subsequent Events

           On November 8, 2023, the Premier of Alberta announced the restructuring of AHS, resulting in the creation
           of four new agencies focusing on primary care, acute care, continuing care and mental health and addiction.
           As of March 31, 2025, two agencies, Recovery Alberta and PCA, are operational (Note 3).

           The provincial health agency responsible for acute care, ACA, was established on February 1, 2025 and
           became operational on April 1, 2025. ACA is accountable to the Ministry of Health. On the effective date of
           April 1, 2025, AHS transferred all of the powers, duties, responsibilities, and functions of AHS necessary
           for ACA to fulfil its responsibility for the governance and coordination of acute care health services across
           Alberta. ACA will continue to engage AHS as a service provider to deliver the acute care services until the
           Minister of Health transfers these acute care services to the new AHS PHC. The full financial effect of the
           restructuring, including the full impact on AHS assets, liabilities and operations is currently unknown.

           The provincial health agency responsible for the continuing care sector, ALA, was established on April 1,
           2025, and is expected to be operational by fall 2025. ALA is accountable to the Alberta Ministry of Seniors,
           Community and Social Services. The full financial effect of the restructuring, including the impact on AHS
           assets, liabilities and operations is currently unknown.

           The Alberta Health Services Provincial Health Corporation Regulation, Alberta Regulation 213/2024 came
           into effect June 1, 2025. As a result of this regulation, the entity Alberta Health Services PHC was
           established for the purposes of delivering health services in the acute care health services sector. The
           operational date and the full financial effect, including the impact on the AHS assets, liabilities and
           operations is currently unknown.

           On October 31, 2024, the Government of Alberta enacted the Real Property Governance Act, 2024
           (Alberta), as part of its efforts to centralize the management of public property to enhance accountability
           and transparency. Under this legislation, all freehold real property owned by AHS was transferred to AI
           effective April 1, 2025. Any debt associated with the freehold real property transferred to AI remains with
           AHS, and no amendments have been made to the terms and conditions of this debt at this time. The analysis
           of the full financial effect, including the impact on the AHS assets, liabilities, and operations is currently
           underway.

           On March 10, 2025, the Government of Alberta announced that the management and oversight of
           emergency health services, including ground, air, dispatch and interfacility transfers, will transfer from AHS
           to ACA later this year. Additionally, on April 8, 2025, the Government of Alberta announced that the cancer
           care and organ tissue services will transfer from AHS to ACA, which will be responsible for overseeing
           cancer services within the province. The full financial effect, including the impact on AHS assets, liabilities,
           and operations is currently unknown.

          The Government of Alberta also announced that a new shared services entity is expected to be established
          and become operational in 2025. This entity will provide corporate and support services for all four provincial
          health agencies, and service providers. The operational date and the full financial effect, including the
          impact on AHS assets, liabilities and operations is currently unknown.




118                                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                      Financial Information



Note 30        Subsequent Events (continued)

           On May 1, 2025, the Government of Alberta introduced Bill 55, the Health Statutes Amendment Act, 2025.
           The bill proposes additional amendments to the Provincial Health Agencies Act, the Public Health Act, and
           other related legislation. As disclosed in public statements from the Government of Alberta, these
           amendments to the legislation will enable key policy shifts to support refocusing efforts, including updating
           the oversight and governance for health foundations and reorganize the governance and planning for public
           health services. The full financial effect, including the impact on AHS assets, liabilities and operations is
           currently unknown.

           On May 16, 2025, the Government of Alberta announced that the Ministry of Health has been divided into
           two new ministries to improve governance and operational focus across the healthcare system. The newly
           established Ministry of Hospital and Surgical Health Services, responsible for acute care, including
           emergency medical services, cancer care, organ and tissue donation, capital planning, procurement, and
           oversight of ACA. The second newly established Ministry of Primary and Preventative Health Services will
           oversee primary care, public health, Indigenous health, health workforce and colleges regulation,
           pharmaceutical and supplementary benefits, diagnostic services, and oversight of PCA. Additionally, the
           Ministry of Seniors, Community and Social Services has been renamed to Assisted Living and Social
           Services to reflect its expanded responsibility for ALA.

           Effective July 1, 2025, approximately 4,365 positions will be transferred from AHS to ALA and PCA. These
           include certain positions transitioning to ALA to support seniors health and continuing care as well positions
           transferring to PCA to support parts of public health, aspects of chronic disease management, and some
           Indigenous wellness. Medical officers of health will also transition to the Ministry of Primary and Preventative
           Health Services, with additional responsibilities for public health to be transferred to this Ministry in the
           future. Additionally, three new provincial health corporations have been established: Emergency Health
           Services PHC, Cancer Care PHC, and Organ and Tissue Donation and Transplantation PHC. These PHCs
           are expected to be operational later this year.


Note 31        Approval of Consolidated Financial Statements

          The consolidated financial statements were approved by the Official Administrator on June 2, 2025 and
          submitted to the Ministry of Health




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                        119
  Financial Information




  Schedule 1 – Consolidated Schedule of Expenses By Object
  For The Year Ended March 31
                                                                              2025                             2024
                                                                 Budget
                                                                 (Note 4)                Actual                Actual
                                                               (Schedule 4)

Salaries and benefits                                      $          9,935,928      $    10,069,576     $      9,839,465
Contracts with health service providers                               3,748,600            3,434,674            3,466,333
Contracts under the Health Facilities Act                                77,000               67,497               55,824
Drugs and gases(i)                                                      742,600              768,984              738,881
Medical supplies(i)                                                     731,700              870,581              815,353
Other contracted services                                             1,664,300            1,679,236            1,688,175
Other(a)                                                              1,682,000            1,575,782            1,685,083
Amortization and loss on disposals/write-downs of
  tangible capital assets (Note 21)                                     561,900              563,648              555,033
Net effect of restructuring and related transactions
(Note 3)                                                                      -                2,761                    -
                                                           $         19,144,028      $    19,032,739     $     18,844,147

(a) Significant amounts included in Other are:
  Equipment expense                                        $            323,300      $       323,441     $        295,346
  Utilities                                                             194,400              173,487              230,705
  Building and ground expenses                                          174,800              134,365              174,780
  Housekeeping, laundry and linen, staff wearing                        145,000              123,452              163,538
     apparel, plant maintenance and biomedical
     engineering supplies(i)
  Building rent                                                         126,000              128,771              125,766
  Food and dietary supplies                                             105,100               94,662               86,029
  Fundraising and grants awarded                                         55,200               77,881               65,734
  Insurance and liability claims                                         47,800               63,662               58,656
  Office supplies and courier                                            54,400               62,735               64,347
  Minor equipment purchases                                              98,100               59,925              103,351
  Travel                                                                 33,000               39,198               46,165
  Telecommunications                                                     37,600               31,790               34,250
  Licenses, fees and memberships                                         24,300               26,717               26,139
  Education                                                              15,500               10,663               14,994
  Other                                                                 247,500              225,033              195,283
                                                           $          1,682,000      $     1,575,782     $      1,685,083

           (i)   Includes inventory valuation adjustments of $588 (2024 – $78,997) (Note 22). The current year valuation
                 adjustment is included in medical supplies and the prior year valuation adjustments are included in drugs
                 and gases, medical supplies, and housekeeping, laundry and linen, staff wearing apparel, plant
                 maintenance and biomedical engineering supplies.




  120                                                                                     Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                   Financial Information




Schedule 2 – Schedules of Renumeration and Benefits
For The Year Ended March 31


 SCHEDULE 2A – OFFICIAL ADMINISTRATOR REMUNERATION FOR THE YEAR ENDED MARCH
                                    31, 2025

                                                                                                            2025                   2024
                                           Term                                                          Remuneration           Remuneration

 Official Administrator
 Andre Tremblay                      Since Jan 31, 2025                                              $                  -       $            -

 Total Official Administrator                                                                        $                  -       $            -

Andre Tremblay was appointed to the position of Official Administrator effective January 31, 2025 per Ministerial Order 808/2025. The
incumbent was not remunerated for this position.

The tenure of the Official Administrator is in lieu of a Board at AHS.



  SCHEDULE 2B – FORMER BOARD REMUNERATION FOR THE YEAR ENDED MARCH 31, 2025

                                                                                                        2025                   2024
                                                   Term                     2025 Committees          Remuneration           Remuneration

   Former Board Chair(f)
   Angela Fong                        Sep 23, 2024 to Jan 31, 2025       FARC, FC, GCHRC         $                75        $            -
   Dr. Lyle Oberg                     Nov 8, 2023 to Sep 22, 2024        FARC, FC, GCHRC                         188                   155

   Former Board Members
   Sandy Edmonstone (Vice             Nov 8, 2023 to Jan 31, 2025        FC (Chair), GCHRC                        43                    14
   Chair)
   Cynthia Farmer(g)                  Nov 8, 2023 to Jan 31, 2025        -                                         -                     -
   Angela Fong                        Nov 21, 2023 to Sep 22, 2024       GCHRC (Chair)                            14                    12
   Paul George Haggis                 Nov 8, 2023 to Jan 31, 2025        FARC (Chair), FC                         43                    14
   Darren Hedley(g)                   Jan 23, 2025 to Jan 31, 2025       -                                         -                     -
   Dr. Lyle Oberg                     Sep 23, 2024 to Jan 31, 2025       -                                        26                     -
   Evan Romanow(g)                    Nov 8, 2023 to Jan 31, 2025        FC                                        -                     -
   Andre Tremblay(g)                  Nov 8, 2023 to Jan 8, 2025         FARC, FC, GCHRC                           -                     -

   Total Former Board                                                                            $               389        $          195

The former Board chair and former Board members were remunerated with monthly honoraria. In addition, former Board members received
remuneration for attendance at Board and committee meetings up until September 22, 2024, at which time there was a change in the compensation
structure.

Board committees were established by the former Board to assist in governing AHS and overseeing the management of AHS’ business and affairs.

Committee legend: FARC = Finance, Audit and Risk Committee, FC = Foundations Committee, GCHRC = Governance, Compliance and Human
Resources Committee.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                          121
Financial Information



  SCHEDULE 2C – FORMER OFFICIAL ADMINISTRATOR / FORMER OFFICIAL ADMINISTRATOR
          COMMITTEE REMUNERATION FOR THE YEAR ENDED MARCH 31, 2025

                                                                                                            2025               2024
                                          Term                                                           Remuneration       Remuneration

 Former Official Administrator
 Dr. John Cowell                    Nov 17, 2022 to Nov 8, 2023                                      $                  -   $         436

 Former Official Administrator Committee Participants
 Tara Lockyer                   Nov 24, 2022 to Nov 8, 2023                                                             -               2
 Gregory Turnbull               Nov 24, 2022 to Nov 8, 2023                                                             -               3
 Tyler White                    Jul 12, 2023 to Nov 8, 2023                                                             -               1
 Gord Winkel                    Nov 24, 2022 to Nov 8, 2023                                                             -               3

 Total Former Official Administrator / Former Official Administrator Committee                       $                  -   $         445

The tenure of the Official Administrator was in lieu of a Board at AHS.

Dr. John Cowell’s last term as Official Administrator ended November 8, 2023 per Ministerial Order 307/2023, and did not serve in the fiscal
year ended March 31, 2025.




122                                                                                                   Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                             Financial Information



 SCHEDULE 2D - EXECUTIVE REMUNERATION AND BENEFITS FOR THE YEAR ENDED MARCH
                                   31, 2025

                                                                                                   2025
                                                                                  Other      Other Non-
                                                                    Base                                                     Severance
              For the Current Fiscal Year                 FTE (a)                 Cash         Cash           Subtotal                         Total
                                                                  Salary (b, h)                                                  (e)
                                                                                Benefits (c) Benefits (d)
Official Administrator/Former Board Direct Reports
Andre Tremblay – Interim President and Chief Executive
 Officer(i, w)                                              0.22 $         48 $           -$          11 $           59 $                - $           59
Athana Mentzelopoulos – President and Chief Executive
 Officer(j)                                                 0.78          454             -           49            503                583       1,086
Ronda White – Chief Audit Executive(k)                      0.94          314             2           81            397                  -         397

CEO Direct Reports

Sean Chilton – Senior VP, Clinical Operations(l, x)         1.00          518             3          106            627                  -         627
Erin O’Neill – Senior VP, Finance and Shared
Services(m, w)                                              0.06             8            -               -              8               -              8
Dr. Sid Viner – VP and Medical Director, Clinical
Operations(k)                                               0.84          433           22            84            539                  -         539
Dr. Peter Jamieson – VP, Quality and Chief Medical
Officer(n)                                                  0.84          420           20           128            568                  -         568
Susan McGillivray – Interim VP, People and Health
 Professions(k)                                             0.94          381             -           77            458                  -         458
Karen Horon – VP, Cancer Care Alberta and Clinical
Support
 Services(k)                                                0.94          363             1           91            455                  -         455
Brenda Hubley – Acting VP, Cancer Care Alberta and
Clinical
 Support Services(o)                                        0.24           74             8           17             99                  -             99
Dr. Mircea Fagarasanu – Interim VP, Provincial Clinical
 Excellence(p)                                              0.92          250           38            70            358                  -         358
Natalie McMurtry – Interim VP, Provincial Clinical
Excellence(q)                                               0.06           18             -             4            22                  -             22
Thomas Mountain – Interim Chief Program Officer,
Addiction and
 Mental Health and Correctional Health Services(r)          0.17           46             -           14             60                  -             60
Kerry Bales – Chief Program Officer, Addiction and
Mental
 Health and Correctional Health Services(s)                 0.25           85             -           27            112                  -         112
Christine Myatt – Senior Program Officer, Community
 Engagement and Communications(t)                           0.90          183             -           52            235                  -         235
Holly Budd – Acting Senior Program Officer, Community
 Engagement and Communications(u)                           0.04             8            2             1            11                  -             11
Michael Lam – Interim VP, Corporate Services and Chief
 Financial Officer(k)                                       0.94          329             1           73            403                  -         403
Andrea Beckwith-Ferraton – Interim General Counsel
and
 Corporate Secretary(k)                                     0.94          228           25            79            332                  -         332
Tracy Chalaturnyk – Transition Lead(v)                      0.92          250           38            52            340                  -         340



Total Executive                                            11.94 $      4,410 $        160 $       1,016 $        5,586 $              583 $     6,169




Management Reporting to CEO Direct Reports                 51.21 $     13,663 $        451 $       2,731 $       16,845 $              980 $    17,825




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                                   123
   Financial Information



    SCHEDULE 2D - EXECUTIVE REMUNERATION AND BENEFITS FOR THE YEAR ENDED MARCH
                                 31, 2025 (CONTINUED)

                                                                                                          2024
                                                                                          Other      Other Non-
                                                                            Base                                                 Severance
                  For the Prior Fiscal Year                     FTE (a)                   Cash         Cash          Subtotal                     Total
                                                                          Salary (b, h)                                             (e)
                                                                                        Benefits (c) Benefits (d)
Board/Former Official Administrator Direct Reports
Athana Mentzelopoulos – President and Chief Executive
 Officer                                                           0.31 $         179 $           -$          88 $         267 $            - $       267
Sean Chilton – Interim President and Chief Executive Officer       0.06            35             -              6          41              -             41
Mauro Chies – President and Chief Executive Officer                0.63           374             -           85           459        1,386         1,845
Ronda White – Chief Audit Executive                                1.00           313             2           73           388              -         388
Athana Mentzelopoulos – Official Administrator Advisor/
 Provisional Lead, Emergency Medical Services                      0.33           119             -           44           163              -         163

CEO Direct Reports
Sean Chilton – Interim VP and Chief Operating Officer,
Clinical
 Operations/VP, People, Health Professions and Information
 Technology                                                        0.94           410           19           102           531              -         531
Lori Anderson – Acting VP and Chief Operating Officer,
Clinical
 Operations                                                        0.03            10             3              2          15              -             15
Deb Gordon – VP and Chief Operating Officer, Clinical
 Operations                                                        0.52           212             -              7         219            970       1,189
Dr. Sid Viner – VP and Medical Director, Clinical Operations       0.90           436           22           102           560              -         560
Dr. Peter Jamieson – Interim VP, Quality and Chief Medical
 Officer                                                           0.33           177             -              -         177              -         177
Dr. Francois Belanger – VP, Quality and Chief Medical
 Officer                                                           0.63           316             -           85           401        1,071         1,472
Susan McGillivray – Interim VP, People and Health
 Professions                                                       0.60           229             -           61           290              -         290
Karen Horon – VP, Cancer Care Alberta and Clinical Support
 Services                                                          1.00           331             1           96           428              -         428
Natalie McMurtry – Interim VP, Provincial Clinical Excellence      0.81           219             -           48           267              -         267
Dr. Braden Manns – Interim VP, Provincial Clinical
Excellence                                                         0.19           107             2              7         116              -         116
Kerry Bales – Chief Program Officer, Addiction and Mental
 Health and Correctional Health Services                           1.00           328             -           99           427              -         427
Holly Budd – Acting Senior Program Officer, Community
 Engagement and Communications                                     0.33            60           12            18            90              -             90
Gail Fredrickson – Interim VP, Community Engagement and
 Communications                                                    0.07            18             2              3          23              -             23
Colleen Turner – VP, Community Engagement and
 Communications                                                    0.60           233             -          103           336            792       1,128
Michael Lam – Interim VP, Corporate Services and Chief
 Financial Officer                                                 0.33            97           12            29           138              -         138
Colleen Purdy – VP, Corporate Services and Chief Financial
 Officer                                                           0.63           273             -           57           330            504         834
Andrea Beckwith-Ferraton – Interim General Counsel and
 Corporate Secretary                                               0.37            86           10            23           119              -         119
Tina Giesbrecht – General Counsel                                  0.63           165             5           49           219            356         575
Geoffrey Pradella – Chief Strategy Officer                         0.35           105             -           26           131            144         275



Total Executive                                                   12.59 $       4,832 $         90 $       1,213 $       6,135 $      5,223 $      11,358




Management Reporting to CEO Direct Reports                        59.68 $     14,938 $         468 $       2,844 $      18,250 $          388 $    18,638




   124                                                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                           Financial Information



          SCHEDULE 2E - EXECUTIVE SUPPLEMENTAL PENSION PLAN AND SUPPLEMENTAL
                                EXECUTIVE RETIREMENT PLAN

Certain employees will receive retirement benefits that supplement the benefits limited under the registered plans for service. The Supplemental
Pension Plan (SPP) is a defined contribution plan and the Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan (SERP) is a defined benefit plan. The amounts
in this table represent the total SPP and SERP benefits earned by the individual during the fiscal year. The current period benefit costs for SPP
and the other costs for SERP included in other non-cash benefits disclosed in Schedule 2D are prorated for the period of time the individual was
in their position directly reporting to the Official Administrator/former Board or directly reporting to the President and Chief Executive Officer. Only
individuals holding a position directly reporting to the Official Administrator/former Board or President and Chief Executive Officer during the current
fiscal year are disclosed.

                                                             2025               2024
                                                   SPP       SERP
                                               Current                                      Account Balance(3) or            Account Balance(3) or
                                                                                                                   Change
                                               Period Other                                   Accrued Benefit                  Accrued Benefit
                                                                Total           Total                             During the
                                               Benefit Costs(2)                                 Obligation                       Obligation
                                                                                                                   Year(4)
                                               Costs(1)                                       March 31, 2024                   March 31, 2025
Andre Tremblay - Interim President and
Chief
 Executive Officer(5)                          $         -$         -$     -$           -$                      -$         -$                      -
Athana Mentzelopoulos - President and
Chief
 Executive Officer(6)                                    -          -      -           14                      14       (14)                       -
Ronda White - Chief Audit Executive                   16            -    16            14                    191         50                     241
Sean Chilton – Senior VP, Clinical
Operations                                            38            -    38            30                    325         94                     419
Erin O’Neill - Senior VP, Finance and
Shared
 Services(5)                                             -          -      -            -                       -          -                       -
Dr. Sid Viner - VP and Medical Director,
Clinical
 Operations                                           36            -    36            31                    203         80                     283
Dr. Peter Jamieson - Interim VP, Quality
and Chief
 Medical Officer                                      33            -    33             -                       -        33                      33
Susan McGillivray - Interim VP, People and
Health
 Professions
    SERP                                                 -      (1)      (1)        (1)                      149           8                    157
    SPP                                               24            -    24            18                    168         27                     195
Karen Horon - VP, Cancer Care Alberta and
 Clinical Support Services                            22            -    22            16                      68        27                      95
Brenda Hubley – Acting VP, Cancer Care
Alberta
 and Clinical Support Services                        12            -    12            10                      60        22                      82
Dr. Mircea Fagarasanu - Interim VP,
Provincial
 Clinical Excellence                                     8          -     8             8                      28        14                      42
Natalie McMurtry - Interim VP, Provincial
Clinical
 Excellence                                           12            -    12             7                      13        15                      28
Thomas Mountain - Interim Chief Program
Officer,
 Addiction and Mental Health and
Correctional
 Health Services(7)                                      3          -     3             -                       -          -                       -
Kerry Bales - Chief Program Officer,
Addiction
 and Mental Health and Correctional Health
 Services(7)                                          10            -    10            16                    251       (251)                       -
Christine Myatt - Senior Program Officer,
 Community Engagement and
Communications                                           -          -      -            -                       -          -                       -




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                                125
  Financial Information



           SCHEDULE 2E - EXECUTIVE SUPPLEMENTAL PENSION PLAN AND SUPPLEMENTAL
                           EXECUTIVE RETIREMENT PLAN (CONTINUED)

                                                            2025              2024
                                                  SPP       SERP
                                               Current                                    Account Balance(3) or            Account Balance(3) or
                                                                                                                 Change
                                               Period Other                                 Accrued Benefit                  Accrued Benefit
                                                                Total         Total                             During the
                                               Benefit Costs(2)                               Obligation                       Obligation
                                                                                                                 Year (4)
                                               Costs(1)                                     March 31, 2024                   March 31, 2025
  Holly Budd - Acting Senior Program Officer,
   Community Engagement and
  Communications(8)                           $         -$         -$    -$           -$                      -$         -$                    -
  Michael Lam - Interim VP, Corporate
  Services and
   Chief Financial Officer                           16            -    16           12                    101         39                   140
  Andrea Beckwith-Ferraton - Interim General
   Counsel and Corporate Secretary                      5          -    5             4                      48        16                    64
  Tracy Chalaturnyk - Transition Lead                   8          -    8             8                    124         30                   154

(1)   The SPP current period benefit costs are AHS contributions earned in the period.
(2)   Other SERP costs include retirement benefits, interest expense on the obligations, and amortization of actuarial gains and losses,
      offset by the expected return on the plan’s assets. AHS uses the straight-line method to amortize actuarial gains and losses over
      the expected average remaining service life of the plan members.
(3)   The account balance represents the total cumulative earned contributions to the SPP as well as cumulative investment gains or
      losses on the contributions.
(4)   Changes in the accrued benefit obligation include current period benefit cost, interest accruing on the obligations and the
      amortization of any actuarial gains or losses in the period. Changes in the account balance include the current benefit costs and
      investment gains or losses related to the account.
(5)   The incumbent is on temporary secondment from the Government of Alberta, and therefore not eligible for enrollment in the SPP.
(6)   The SPP had not fully vested at the time of the incumbent’s departure, and as a result no current period benefit costs were incurred.
(7)   The incumbent’s account balance transitioned to Recovery Alberta effective September 1, 2024.
(8)   The incumbent’s pensionable earnings were below the threshold for enrollment in the SPP.




  126                                                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                     Financial Information



                FOOTNOTES TO THE SCHEDULES OF REMUNERATION AND BENEFITS
                            FOR THE YEAR ENDED MARCH 31, 2025

         Definitions

          a.   For this schedule, full time equivalents (FTE) are determined by actual hours earned divided by 2,022.75 annual base hours
               (2024 – 2,030.50 hours).

          b.   Base salary is regular salary and includes all payments earned related to actual hours earned other than those reported as
               other cash benefits.

          c.   Other cash benefits include, as applicable, honoraria, acting pay, membership fees, and lump sum payments. Relocation
               expenses are excluded from compensation disclosure as they are considered to be recruiting costs to AHS and not part of
               compensation unless related to severance. Expense reimbursements are also excluded from compensation disclosure except
               where the expenses meet the definition of the other cash benefits listed above.

          d.   Other non-cash benefits include:
                  • Employer’s current period benefit costs and other costs of supplemental pension plan and supplemental executive
                      retirement plans as defined in Schedule 2E
                  • Employer’s share of employee benefit contributions and payments made on behalf of employees including pension,
                      health care, dental and vision coverage, out-of-country medical benefits, group life insurance, accidental disability and
                      dismemberment insurance, and long and short-term disability plans
                  • Vacation accruals, and
                  • Employer’s share of the cost of additional benefits including sabbaticals or other special leave with pay.

          e.   Severance includes direct or indirect payments to individuals upon termination which are not included in other cash benefits
               or other non-cash benefits.

         Former Board

          f.   The former Board Chairs were Ex-Officio members on all former Board committees.

          g.   These individuals did not claim honoraria.

         Executive

          h.   Base salary reported for executives are the actual payments earned during the year, and is therefore contingent on the number
               of AHS’ work days in the year. For the year ended March 31, 2025, the number of work days at AHS was 261 (2024 – 260
               work days).

          i.   Andre Tremblay was appointed to the position of Interim President and Chief Executive Officer effective January 8, 2025. The
               incumbent was also appointed Official Administrator effective January 31, 2025. The incumbent is on temporary secondment
               from the Government of Alberta and received remuneration and benefits from AHS commencing February 19, 2025.

          j.   Athana Mentzelopoulos held the position of President and Chief Executive Officer until January 8, 2025 at which time she left
               AHS. The incumbent received salary and other accrued entitlements to the date of departure. The reported severance
               included 12 months base salary at the rate in effect at the date of departure. In addition, the incumbent received a vacation
               payout of $108 for unused accrued vacation at the time of departure; accrued vacation has been recorded in their
               compensation as a non-cash benefit in the period it was earned. The reported severance is still subject to change.

          k.   As a result of restructuring, the incumbent ceased to be a direct report to the President and Chief Executive Officer effective
               March 10, 2025.

          l.   Sean Chilton held the position of Interim VP and Chief Operating Officer, Clinical Operations until February 26, 2025 at which
               time he was appointed to Senior Vice President, Clinical Operations.

          m. Erin O’Neill was appointed to the position of Senior Vice President, Finance and Shared Services effective March 10, 2025.
             The incumbent is on temporary secondment from the Government of Alberta and received the reported renumeration from
             AHS in addition to her Government of Alberta compensation.

          n.   Dr. Peter Jamieson held the position of Interim Vice President, Quality and Chief Medical Officer until April 15, 2024 at which
               time he was appointed to Vice President, Quality and Chief Medical Officer. The incumbent’s remuneration while Interim Vice
               President, Quality and Chief Medical Officer was as per the terms of a Medical Administrative Services Agreement. The
               incumbent became an employee of AHS with his appointment as Vice President, Quality and Chief Medical Officer. As a
               result of restructuring, the incumbent ceased to be a direct report to the President and Chief Executive Officer effective March
               10, 2025.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                          127
Financial Information



                FOOTNOTES TO THE SCHEDULES OF REMUNERATION AND BENEFITS
                     FOR THE YEAR ENDED MARCH 31, 2025 (CONTINUED)

          o.   Brenda Hubley held the position of Chief Program Officer, Cancer Care Alberta until October 16, 2024 at which time she was
               appointed to Acting Vice President, Cancer Care Alberta and Clinical Support Services and became a direct report to the
               President and Chief Executive Officer. This appointment was to provide coverage for a leave of absence by Karen Horon.
               The incumbent held the position of Acting Vice President, Cancer Care Alberta and Clinical Support Services until January
               10, 2025 at which time the incumbent resumed the role of Chief Program Officer, Cancer Care Alberta and was no longer a
               direct report to the President and Chief Executive Officer.

          p.   Dr. Mircea Fagarasanu held the position of Senior Program Officer, Workplace Health and Safety until April 8, 2024 at which
               time he was appointed to Interim Vice President, Provincial Clinical Excellence and became a direct report to the President
               and Chief Executive Officer. As a result of restructuring, the incumbent ceased to be a direct report to the President and Chief
               Executive Officer effective March 10, 2025.

          q.   Natalie McMurtry was seconded to the Government of Alberta for a two-year term effective April 22, 2024. During this
               secondment, the incumbent is on leave from all duties at AHS and ceases to be a direct report to the President and Chief
               Executive Officer at AHS.

          r.   Thomas Mountain held the position of Lead, Addiction and Mental Health Operations until July 1, 2024 at which time he was
               appointed to Interim Chief Program Officer, Addiction and Mental Health and Correctional Health Services and became a
               direct report to the President and Chief Executive Officer. The incumbent’s position transitioned to Recovery Alberta effective
               September 1, 2024 as per Ministerial Order 801/2024.

          s.   Kerry Bales held the position of Chief Program Officer, Addiction and Mental Health and Correctional Health Services until
               June 30, 2024 at which time he left AHS to assume the position of Chief Executive Officer for Recovery Alberta. In addition,
               the incumbent received a vacation payout of $95 for unused accrued vacation at the time of departure; accrued vacation has
               been recorded in their compensation as a non-cash benefit in the period it was earned.

          t.   Christine Myatt was appointed to the position of Senior Program Officer, Community Engagement and Communications
               effective April 16, 2024. As a result of restructuring, the incumbent ceased to be a direct report to the President and Chief
               Executive Officer effective March 10, 2025.

          u.   Holly Budd held the position of Acting Senior Program Officer, Community Engagement and Communications until April 16,
               2024 at which time she resumed the role of Executive Director, Communications and was no longer a direct report to the
               President and Chief Executive Officer.

          v.   Tracy Chalaturnyk was appointed to the temporary role of Transition Lead effective April 8, 2024 and became a direct report
               to the President and Chief Executive Officer. These duties are in addition to her position as Senior Program Officer, Human
               Resource Business Partnerships. As a result of restructuring, the incumbent ceased to be a direct report to the President and
               Chief Executive Officer effective March 10, 2025.

         Termination Obligations

          w. There is no severance associated with the secondment agreement. Upon termination of the secondment agreement, the
             incumbent is to return to the incumbent’s regular position at the Government of Alberta.

          x.   In the case of termination without just cause by AHS, the incumbent shall receive severance pay equal to 24 months’ salary
               and benefits.




128                                                                                                     Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                     Financial Information




Schedule 3 - Consolidated Schedule of Segment Disclosures
FOR THE YEAR ENDED MARCH 31



                                                                                                                 2025

                                                                                                                                                   Amortization
                                               Contracts          Contracts                                                                        and loss on
                                                                                                                  Other                                                Net effect of
                            Salaries and       with health        under the     Drugs and       Medical                                          disposals/ write-                           Total
                                                                                                                contracted       Other                                restructuring
                              benefits          service             Health        gases         supplies                                            downs of
                                                                                                                 services                                              transaction
                                               providers         Facilities Act                                                                  tangible capital
                                                                                                                                                     assets
Continuing care             $    376,905 $        1,044,780 $                - $     7,645 $         6,733 $         27,351 $        17,655 $               3,632 $                    - $    1,484,701
Community care                   695,117            877,022                  -       5,245           5,168              51,958       32,138                   948                      -      1,667,596

Home care                        406,715            370,276                  -        323           12,131          150,055          19,163                   617                      -        959,280

Acute care                      3,476,632           494,095            67,497      699,820         524,880          724,403         152,790                68,336                      -      6,208,453
Emergency medical
services                         382,817            249,786                  -       3,470           5,732               3,416       42,991                21,551                      -        709,763
Diagnostic and
 therapeutic services           2,001,386           128,549                  -      45,014         298,453          404,704         106,987                53,372                      -      3,038,465
Population and
 public health                   367,386             21,726                  -       5,728          10,932               8,553       16,694                   678                      -        431,697
Research and
 education                       208,308              2,345                  -         91              547          122,274          41,725                    51                      -        375,341
Information
  technology                     376,215              1,963                  -              -         (203)             25,746      240,682               169,223                      -        813,626

Support services                1,363,190           200,698                  -       1,648           6,120          114,122         835,067               243,897                      -      2,764,742

Administration                   414,905             43,434                  -              -              88           46,654       69,890                 1,343                      -        576,314
Net effect of
restructuring transaction                  -                 -               -              -               -                -               -                   -              2,761                2,761

Total                       $ 10,069,576 $        3,434,674 $          67,497 $    768,984 $       870,581 $       1,679,236 $    1,575,782 $             563,648 $            2,761 $       19,032,739




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                      129
        Financial Information



               SCHEDULE 3 - CONSOLIDATED SCHEDULE OF SEGMENT DISCLOSURES
                                       (CONTINUED)
                               FOR THE YEAR ENDED MARCH 31

                                                                             2024
                                                                                                               Amortization
                                            Contracts
                                Contracts                                                                       and loss on
                                            under the                                 Other
                   Salaries and with health            Drugs and       Medical                                   disposals/         Total
                                             Health                                 contracted     Other
                     benefits    service                 gases         supplies                                 write-downs
                                            Facilities                               services
                                providers                                                                        of tangible
                                              Act
                                                                                                               capital assets
Continuing care    $    340,236 $   951,304 $         -$     7,566 $       7,657 $      42,481 $      23,068 $         3,048    $    1,375,360
Community care          927,558     945,293           -      9,574         5,428        53,219        41,622             934         1,983,628

Home care               370,243     358,439           -       199         11,593        83,992        18,683             560           843,709

Acute care             3,427,032    462,215      55,824    654,905       472,626       744,026       202,602          65,645         6,084,875
Emergency
medical services        357,098     230,011           -      2,800         5,952         3,869        49,822          16,402           665,954
Diagnostic and
 therapeutic           1,820,366    264,783           -     35,072       256,841       368,902       120,658          66,162         2,932,784
    i
Population and
 public health          351,956      24,052           -      5,634        23,861         9,609        23,448             613           439,173
Research and
 education              194,329        3,229          -       108            453       119,400        35,066             122           352,707
Information
  technology            358,249        1,951          -          -           (32)       42,702       242,264         148,641           793,775

Support services       1,279,425    185,744           -     22,996        30,828       164,998       864,210         250,171         2,798,372

Administration          412,973      39,312           -        27            146        54,977        63,640            2,735          573,810

Total              $   9,839,465 $ 3,466,333 $   55,824 $ 738,881 $      815,353 $ 1,688,175 $     1,685,083 $       555,033 $      18,844,147




        130                                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                           Financial Information




  Schedule 4 – Consolidated Schedule of The Revised Budget

                                   Reconciliation of the Current Year presentation for the Budget
                                             FOR THE YEAR ENDED MARCH 31, 2025

                                                    2025                                    Transfer of
                                                                   Transfer of mental
                                                   Original                                primary care               2025
                                                                  health and addiction
                                                  Budget as                                operations to             Revised
                                                                     operations to
                                                  currently                                Primary Care              Budget(i)
                                                                   Recovery Alberta
                                                  presented                                   Alberta
Revenues:
  Alberta Health transfers
    Base operating                            $      14,602,924     $         (22,292)              (25,525)    $        14,555,107
    Other operating                                   1,653,528                  (505)              (21,728)              1,631,295
  Recognition of expended deferred capital              102,100                      -                     -                102,100
revenue
  Other government transfers                          1,652,176              (773,948)               (2,249)                875,979
  Fees and charges                                      621,000                (3,485)                 (708)                616,807
  Ancillary operations                                   92,700                      -                     -                 92,700
  Donations and non-government
    contributions                                      170,900                  (1,671)                   -                 169,229
  Investment and other income(a)                       248,700                 151,092                1,665                 401,457

TOTAL REVENUES                                       19,144,028              (650,809)              (48,545)             18,444,674

Expenses:
 Continuing care                                      1,425,800                (3,909)                     -              1,421,891
 Community care                                       2,132,200              (380,384)              (42,218)              1,709,598
 Home care                                              930,200                      -                     -                930,200
 Acute care                                           6,081,528              (200,640)               (2,088)              5,878,800
 Emergency medical services                             735,400                      -                     -                735,400
 Diagnostic and therapeutic services                  2,956,600               (45,135)                 (276)              2,911,189
 Population and public health                           420,900                (2,702)                 (107)                418,091
 Research and education                                 378,400                (1,718)                     -                376,682
 Information technology                                 804,300                  (283)                     -                804,017
 Support services                                     2,713,800                (8,473)               (2,291)              2,703,036
 Administration                                         564,900                (7,565)               (1,565)                555,770

TOTAL EXPENSES                                       19,144,028              (650,809)              (48,545)             18,444,674

ANNUAL OPERATING SURPLUS                                      -                       -                     -                      -


Accumulated surplus, beginning of year                1,304,458                       -                     -             1,304,458
Accumulated surplus, end of year              $       1,304,458     $                 -                     -   $         1,304,458

         (i)   The revised budget, resulting from the restructuring of AHS (Note 1), was approved by the former AHS Board
               on January 27, 2025.




  Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                          131
         Financial Information



                SCHEDULE 4 – CONSOLIDATED SCHEDULE OF THE REVISED BUDGET
                                       (CONTINUED)
                                         Reconciliation of the Current Year presentation for the Budget
                                                   FOR THE YEAR ENDED MARCH 31, 2025


                                                                 Transfer of mental       Transfer of
                                                  2025                                   primary care       Community
                                                                health and addiction                                            2025
                                                 Original                                operations to     Lab Services
                                                                   operations to                                               Revised
                                                 Budget                                  Primary Care       Correction
                                                                 Recovery Alberta                                              Budget(i)
                                                                                            Alberta

 Salaries and benefits                      $     9,935,928        $      (484,130)            (38,794)         82,887     $     9,495,891
 Contracts with health service
providers                                         3,748,600               (137,291)             (4,773)      (133,744)           3,472,792
 Contracts under the Health Facilities
 Act                                                 77,000                       -                   -              -              77,000
 Drugs and gases                                    742,600                 (7,557)                (27)              -             735,016
 Medical supplies                                   731,700                 (1,517)                (57)         30,940             761,066
 Other contracted services                        1,664,300                 (8,956)               (628)          8,071           1,662,787
 Other                                            1,682,000                (11,358)             (4,266)         11,846           1,678,222
 Amortization and loss on
   disposals/write-downs of tangible
   capital assets (Note 21)                         561,900                       -                   -               -           561,900
                                            $    19,144,028        $      (650,809)            (48,545)               -    $   18,444,674

 (a) Significant amounts included in
 Other are:
   Equipment expense                        $       323,300        $           (959)               (51)               -    $       322,290
   Utilities                                        194,400                      (2)                  -               -            194,398
   Building and ground expenses                     174,800                    (190)                  -               -            174,610
   Housekeeping, laundry and linen,
    staff wearing apparel, plant
    maintenance and biomedical
      engineering supplies                          145,000                 (1,051)                (22)              -             143,927
   Building rent                                    126,000                   (432)               (117)              -             125,451
   Minor equipment purchases                         98,100                   (286)                 (7)              -              97,807
   Food and dietary supplies                        105,100                   (692)                   -              -             104,408
   Fundraising and grants awarded                    55,200                       -                   -              -              55,200
   Office supplies and courier                       54,400                 (3,164)                (35)         11,846              63,047
   Insurance and liability claims                    47,800                    (14)             (1,032)              -              46,754
   Travel                                            33,000                 (1,920)                (45)              -              31,035
   Telecommunications                                37,600                    (28)                 (1)              -              37,571
   Licenses, fees and memberships                    24,300                   (192)                 (6)              -              24,102
   Education                                         15,500                   (284)                (10)              -              15,206
   Other                                            247,500                 (2,144)             (2,940)              -             242,416
                                            $     1,682,000        $       (11,358)             (4,266)         11,846     $     1,678,222
               (i)   The revised budget, resulting from the restructuring of AHS (Note 1), was approved by the former AHS Board
                     on January 27, 2025.




         132                                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                                       Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta
Financial Statements
Table of Contents

         Management's Responsibility for Financial Reporting ……………………………………... 134

         Independent Auditor’s Report ....................................................................................................... 135

         Statement of Operations ................................................................................................................... 138

         Statement of Financial Position ..................................................................................................... 139

         Statement of Change in Net Financial Assets ...........................................................................140

         Schedule 1 – Expenses – Detailed by Object ............................................................................. 151

         Schedule 2 – Salary and Benefits Disclosure ............................................................................ 152

         Schedule 3 – Related Party Transactions................................................................................... 153




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                                           133
Financial Information




Management’s Responsibility for Financial Reporting
The accompanying financial statements are the responsibility of management and have been reviewed and approved
by Senior Management. The financial statements were prepared in accordance with Canadian Public Sector
Accounting Standards, and of necessity, include some amounts that are based on estimates and judgement.

To discharge its responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of financial reporting, management maintains a system
of internal accounting controls comprising written policies, standards and procedures, a formal authorization
structure, and satisfactory processes for reviewing internal controls. This system provides management with
reasonable assurance that transactions are in accordance with governing legislation and are properly authorized,
reliable financial records are maintained, and assets are adequately safeguarded.

The Health Quality Council of Alberta’s Board of Directors carries out their responsibility for the financial statements
through the Audit and Finance Committee. The Committee meets with management and the Auditor General of
Alberta to review financial matters and recommends the financial statements to the Health Quality Council of Alberta
Board of Directors for approval upon finalization of the audit. The Auditor General of Alberta has open and complete
access to the Audit and Finance Committee.

The Auditor General of Alberta provides an independent audit of the financial statements. His examination is
conducted in accordance with Canadian Generally Accepted Auditing Standards and includes tests and procedures,
which allow him to report on the fairness of the financial statements prepared by management.

On behalf of the Health Quality Council of Alberta.




[Originally signed by]                                                              [Originally signed by]

 Interim Chief Executive Officer                                                    Director, Financial Services
 Dr. David Zygun                                                                    Jessica Wing
 May 28, 2025                                                                       May 28, 2025




134                                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Financial Information




Independent Auditor’s Report
To the Board of Directors of the Health Quality Council of Alberta


Report on the Financial Statements

Opinion
I have audited the financial statements of the Health Quality Council of Alberta, which comprise the
statement of financial position as at March 31, 2025, and the statements of operations, change in
net financial assets, and cash flows for the year then ended, and notes to the financial statements,
including a summary of significant accounting policies.

In my opinion, the accompanying financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of the Health Quality Council of Alberta as at March 31, 2025, and the results of its
operations, its changes in net financial assets, and its cash flows for the year then ended in
accordance with Canadian public sector accounting standards.

Basis for opinion
I conducted my audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards. My
responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor's Responsibilities for the
Audit of the Financial Statements section of my report. I am independent of the Health Quality
Council of Alberta in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to my audit of the
financial statements in Canada, and I have fulfilled my other ethical responsibilities in accordance
with these requirements. I believe that the audit evidence I have obtained is sufficient and
appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion.

Other information
Management is responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the
information included in the Annual Report, but does not include the financial statements and my
auditor’s report thereon. The Annual Report is expected to be made available to me after the date of
this auditor’s report.

My opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and I do not express
any form of assurance conclusion thereon.

In connection with my audit of the financial statements, my responsibility is to read the other
information identified above and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially
inconsistent with the financial statements or my knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise
appears to be materially misstated.

If, based on the work I will perform on this other information, I conclude that there is a material
misstatement of this other information, I am required to communicate the matter to those charged
with governance.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                       135
Financial Information



Responsibilities of management and those charged with governance for the financial
statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements in
accordance with Canadian public sector accounting standards, and for such internal control as
management determines is necessary to enable the preparation of the financial statements that are
free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.

In preparing the financial statements, management is responsible for assessing the Health Quality
Council of Alberta’s ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related
to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless an intention exists to
liquidate or to cease operations, or there is no realistic alternative but to do so.

Those charged with governance are responsible for overseeing the Health Quality Council of
Alberta’s financial reporting process.

Auditor's responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements
My objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a
whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor's
report that includes my opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a
guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing
standards will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from
fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably
be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial
statements.

As part of an audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards, I exercise
professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit. I also:
• Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due
    to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain
    audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion. The risk of
    not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from
    error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the
    override of internal control.
• Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit
    procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an
    opinion on the effectiveness of the Health Quality Council of Alberta's internal control.
• Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting
    estimates and related disclosures made by management.
• Conclude on the appropriateness of management’s use of the going concern basis of accounting
    and, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to
    events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Health Quality Council of Alberta’s
    ability to continue as a going concern. If I conclude that a material uncertainty exists, I am
    required to draw attention in my auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the financial
    statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify my opinion. My conclusions are
    based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of my auditor’s report. However, future
    events or conditions may cause the Health Quality Council of Alberta to cease to continue as a
    going concern.




136                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Financial Information



•   Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements, including
    the disclosures, and whether the financial statements represent the underlying transactions
    and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation.

I communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the planned
scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in
internal control that I identify during my audit.




[Originally signed by W. Doug Wylie FCPA, FCMA, ICD.D]
Auditor General

May 28, 2025
Edmonton, Alberta




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                       137
Financial Information




Statement of Operations
Year ended March 31
(thousands of dollars)

                                                                   2025                      2024

                                                        Budget            Actual            Actual
                                                        (Note 4)
Revenues
   Alberta Health transfers
      Base operating                                $     7,711       $    7,711        $       7,672

      Restricted operating (Note 6)                        366               859                1,053

   Other government transfer (Note 6)                         -                 -                 125

   Interest income                                          75                 91                 132

   Other revenue                                              -                28                   25

                                                          8,152            8,689                9,007



Expenses (Schedule 1)
   Administration                                         1,633            1,629                1,544

   Health system analytics                                4,135            3,416                3,010

   Health system improvement                              1,780            1,705                1,629

   Communications and engagement                          1,547            1,358                1,391

   Ministerial assessment/study (Note 6)                   366               859                1,178

   Minister priorities                                        -              288                      -

                                                          9,461            9,255                8,752



Annual operating (deficit) surplus                      (1,309)             (566)                 255

Accumulated operating surplus, beginning of year          1,589            2,206                1,951

Accumulated operating surplus, end of year          $      280        $    1,640        $       2,206




The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




138                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                    Financial Information




Statement of Financial Position
Year ended March 31
(thousands of dollars)

                                                                          2025             2024
Financial Assets
   Cash                                                              $   2,157        $          4,346
   Accounts receivable                                                         25                   37
                                                                         2,182                   4,383
Liabilities
   Accounts payable and other accrued liabilities                          800                   1,069
   Unspent deferred contributions (Note 6)                                     88                1,609
   Employee future benefits (Note 7)                                           53                   43
   Deferred lease inducements (Note 8)                                         30                   16
                                                                           971                   2,737


Net Financial Assets                                                     1,211                   1,646


Non-Financial Assets
   Tangible capital assets (Note 9)                                        293                     463
   Purchased intangibles                                                       11                   12
   Prepaid expenses                                                        125                      85
                                                                           429                     560


Net Assets                                                               1,640                   2,206


Net Assets
Accumulated operating surplus (Note 11)                              $   1,640        $          2,206




Contractual obligations (Note 10)


The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                     139
Financial Information




Statement of Change in Net Financial Assets
Year ended March 31
(thousands of dollars)

                                                                  2025                        2024
                                                       Budget            Actual              Actual
                                                       (Note 4)


Annual operating (deficit) surplus                 $    (1,309)      $     (566)         $       255


Acquisition of tangible capital assets (Note 9)               -                (13)              (16)
Acquisition of purchased intangibles                          -                   -              (12)
Amortization of tangible capital assets (Note 9)           178                 183               210
Amortization of purchased intangibles                         -                  1                   -
Decrease in prepaid expenses                                  -                (40)               13
(Decrease) / Increase in net financial assets in
the year                                                (1,131)            (435)                 450
Net financial assets, beginning of year                   1,589            1,646               1,196
Net financial assets, end of year                  $       458       $     1,211         $     1,646




The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




140                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Financial Information




  Statement of Cash Flows
  Year ended March 31
  (thousands of dollars)

                                                                                   2025             2024
Operating Transactions
   Annual operating (deficit) surplus                                          $    (566)      $       255
   Non-cash items:
    Amortization of tangible capital assets (Note 9)                                  183              210
    Amortization of purchased intangibles                                                 1                -
    Amortization of deferred lease inducements (Note 8)                                (4)               (2)
    Increase in employee future benefits (Note 7)                                      10                  8
                                                                                    (376)              471
   Decrease in accounts receivable                                                     12              672
   (Increase) Decrease in prepaid expenses                                            (40)               13
   (Decrease) Increase in accounts payable and other accrued liabilities            (269)              378
   (Decrease) Increase in unspent deferred contributions (Note 6)                  (1,521)             222
   Increase in deferred lease inducement (Note 8)                                      18                18
   Cash (applied to) provided by operating transactions                            (2,176)           1,774


Capital Transactions
   Acquisition of tangible capital assets (Note 9)                                    (13)             (16)
   Purchase of intangibles                                                                -            (12)
   Cash (applied to) capital transactions                                             (13)             (28)


(Decrease) Increase in cash                                                        (2,189)           1,746


Cash at beginning of year                                                           4,346            2,600
Cash at end of year                                                            $    2,157      $     4,346




The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




  Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                       141
Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements
March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

Note 1            AUTHORITY
                  The Health Quality Council of Alberta (HQCA) is a government not-for-profit organization formed
                  under the Health Quality Council of Alberta Act.
                  Pursuant to the Act, the HQCA has a mandate to promote and improve patient safety, person-
                  centered care and health service quality on a province-wide basis. The HQCA is exempt from
                  income taxes under the Income Tax Act.

Note 2            SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND
                  REPORTING PRACTICES
                  These financial statements are prepared in accordance with Canadian Public Sector Accounting
                  Standards (PSAS).

                  (a)    Reporting Entity
                  The financial statements reflect the assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses of the HQCA.

                  (b) Basis of Financial Reporting
                  Revenues
                  All revenues are reported on the accrual basis of accounting.
                  Revenues from transactions with performance obligations are recognized as the performance
                  obligations are satisfied by providing the promised services to the payors. Course fees are
                  recognized in the year that courses are delivered.
                  Cash received for which services have not been provided by year end is recognized as unearned
                  revenue.
                  Revenues from transactions with no performance obligations are recognized at their realizable
                  value when the HQCA has the authority to claim or retain an inflow of economic resources and
                  identifies a past transaction or event that gives rise to an asset.
                  Government transfers
                  Transfers from all governments are referred to as government transfers.
                  Government transfers and the associated externally restricted investment income are recognized
                  as deferred contributions when the stipulations together with the HQCA’s actions and
                  communications as to the use of the transfer, create a liability. These transfers are recognized as
                  revenue as the stipulations are met and, when applicable, the HQCA complies with its
                  communicated use of these transfers.
                  All other government transfers, without stipulations for the use of the transfer, are recognized as
                  revenue when the transfer is authorized and the HQCA meets the eligibility criteria (if any).

                  Expenses
                  Expenses are reported on an accrual basis. The cost of all goods consumed and services received
                  during the year are expensed.
                  Grants and transfers are recognized as expenses when the transfer is authorized and eligibility
                  criteria have been met by the recipient.




142                                                                                     Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                     Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements
March 31, 2025
(in thousands)


Note 2            SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND
                  REPORTING PRACTICES (CONT’D)
                  (b) Basis of Financial Reporting (Cont’d)
                  Valuation of Financial Assets and Liabilities
                  The HQCA’s financial assets and liabilities are generally measured as follows:

                    Financial Statement Component                         Measurement

                    Cash                                                  Cost

                    Accounts receivable                                   Lower of cost or net recoverable value

                    Accounts payable and other accrued liabilities        Cost

                  The HQCA does not hold equities traded in an active market, nor engage in derivative contracts or
                  foreign currency transactions. The HQCA is not exposed to remeasurement gains or losses and,
                  consequently, a statement of remeasurement gains and losses is not presented.

                  Financial Assets
                  Financial assets are assets that could be used to discharge existing liabilities or finance future
                  operations and are not for consumption in the normal course of operations.

                  Financial assets are the HQCA’s financial claims on external organizations and individuals as well
                  as cash at the year end.

                  Cash
                  Cash comprises cash on hand and demand deposits.

                  Accounts Receivable
                  Accounts receivable are recognized at the lower of cost or net recoverable value. A valuation
                  allowance is recognized when recovery is uncertain.

                  Liabilities
                  Liabilities represent present obligations of the HQCA to external organizations and individuals
                  arising from past transactions or events occurring before the year end, the settlement of which is
                  expected to result in the future sacrifice of economic benefits. They are recognized when there is
                  an appropriate basis of measurement and management can reasonably estimate the amounts.

                  Deferred Lease Inducements
                  Deferred lease inducements represent amounts received for leasehold improvements and the value
                  of a rent-free period. Lease inducements are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis over




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                       143
Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements
March 31, 2025
(in thousands)


Note 2            SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND
                  REPORTING PRACTICES (CONT’D)
                  (b)       Basis of Financial Reporting (Cont’d)
                  the term of the related lease and the amortization is recognized as a reduction of rent expense for
                  the year.

                  Employee Future Benefits
                  The HQCA Board has approved a defined contribution Supplementary Executive Retirement Plan
                  (SERP) for certain members of its executive staff. The SERP supplements the benefit under the
                  HQCA registered plan that is limited by the Income Tax Act (Canada). The HQCA contributes a
                  certain percentage of an eligible employee’s pensionable earnings in excess of the limits of the
                  Income Tax Act (Canada). This plan provides participants with an account balance at retirement
                  based on the contributions made to the plan and investment income earned on the contributions
                  based on investment decisions made by the participants.

                  Non-Financial Assets
                  Non-financial assets are acquired, constructed, or developed assets that do not normally provide
                  resources to discharge existing liabilities, but instead:

                  (a) are normally employed to deliver government services;
                  (b) may be consumed in the normal course of operations; and
                  (c) are not for sale in the normal course of operations.
                  Non-financial assets are limited to tangible capital assets, purchased intangibles and prepaid
                  expenses.

                  Tangible Capital Assets
                  Tangible capital assets are recognized at cost less amortization, which includes amounts that are
                  directly related to the acquisition, design, construction, development, improvement or betterment of
                  the assets. Cost includes overhead directly attributable to construction and development, as well as
                  interest costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition or construction of the asset.

                  The cost, less residual value, of the tangible capital assets, excluding work-in-progress, is
                  amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives as follows:

                        Computer hardware and software      5 years

                        Office equipment                    10 years

                        Leasehold improvements              Over term of the lease

                  Tangible capital assets are written down when conditions indicate that they no longer contribute to
                  HQCA’s ability to provide services, or when the value of future economic benefits associated with
                  the tangible capital assets are less than their book value. The net write-downs are accounted for
                  as expenses in the Statement of Operations




144                                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                     Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements
March 31, 2025
(in thousands)


Note 2            SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND
                  REPORTING PRACTICES (CONT’D)
                  (b)    Basis of Financial Reporting (Cont’d)
                  Purchased Intangible Assets
                  Purchased Intangibles are identifiable non-monetary economic resources without physical
                  substance acquired through an arms-length exchange transaction. Purchased Intangibles are
                  recognized at cost less amortization, and tested regularly for impairment. The cost, less any
                  residual value, of purchased intangible assets is amortized on a straight-line basis over its useful
                  life in a manner appropriate to its nature and use, which is normally the shortest of the
                  technological, commercial, and legal life.

                  Prepaid Expenses
                  Prepaid expenses are recognized at cost and amortized based on the terms of the agreement.

                  Funds and Reserves
                  Certain amounts, as approved by the Board of Directors, are set aside in accumulated operating
                  surplus for future operating and capital purposes. Transfers to/from funds and reserves are an
                  adjustment to the respective fund when approved.

                  Measurement Uncertainty
                  Measurement uncertainty exists when there is a variance between the recognized or disclosed
                  amount and another reasonably possible amount. The amounts recognized for amortization of
                  tangible capital assets are based on estimates of the useful life of the related assets. Actual results
                  could differ from estimates.


Note 3            FUTURE CHANGES IN ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
                  On April 1, 2026, the HQCA will adopt the following new conceptual framework and accounting
                  standard approved by the Public Sector Accounting Board:

                  The Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting in the Public Sector
                  The Conceptual Framework is the foundation for public sector financial reporting standard setting. It
                  replaces the conceptual aspects of Section PS 1000 Financial Statement Concepts and Section PS
                  1100 Financial Statement Objectives. The conceptual framework highlights considerations
                  fundamental for the consistent application of accounting issues in the absence of specific
                  standards.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                         145
Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements
March 31, 2025
(in thousands)


Note 3            FUTURE CHANGES IN ACCOUNTING STANDARDS (CONT’D)
                  PS 1202 Financial Statement Presentation
                  Section PS 1202 sets out general and specific requirements for the presentation of information in
                  general purpose financial statements. The financial statement presentation principles are based on
                  the concepts within the Conceptual Framework.

                  Management is currently assessing the impact of the conceptual framework and the standard on
                  the financial statements.


Note 4            BUDGET
                  The HQCA’s 2024-2025 operating budget was approved by the Board of Directors on January 24,
                  2024 and submitted to the Ministry of Health.


Note 5            FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
                  The HQCA has the following financial instruments: cash, accounts receivable, accounts payable
                  and other accrued liabilities.

                  The HQCA has exposure to the following risks from its use of financial instruments: interest rate
                  risk, liquidity risk, price risk and credit risk.

                  (a) Interest rate risk
                  The HQCA is exposed to the interest rate associated with cash held in the bank. The interest rate
                  risk is minimal.

                  (b) Liquidity risk
                  Liquidity risk is the risk that the HQCA will encounter difficulty in meeting obligations associated
                  with financial liabilities. The HQCA enters into transactions to purchase goods and services on
                  credit. Liquidity risk is measured by reviewing the HQCA’s future net cash flows for the possibility of
                  negative net cash flow. The HQCA manages the liquidity risk resulting from its accounts payable
                  obligations by maintaining adequate cash resources.

                  (c) Credit risk
                  The HQCA is exposed to credit risk from potential non-payment of accounts receivable. During the
                  fiscal year most of the HQCA’s receivables are from provincial agencies; therefore the credit risk is
                  minimized.




146                                                                                     Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                           Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements
March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

Note 6             UNSPENT DEFERRED CONTRIBUTIONS
                                                                                     2025                            2024

                                                               Alberta
                                                               Health              Other                Total       Total

                 Balance at beginning of the year          $       947        $          662      $     1,609   $     1,387

                 Cash (disbursed) received during the
                 year                                                 -                 (662)           (662)         1,400

                 Amounts recognized as revenue                   (859)                      -           (859)        (1,178)

                 Balance at end of year                    $        88        $             -     $       88    $     1,609


                  The unspent deferred contribution from Alberta Health at the end of the year is externally restricted to
                  support the Pandemic Data Review task force to provide recommendations to the Minister. The
                  balance in other relates to an externally restricted grant from the Ministry of Mental Health and
                  Addiction that was transferred to the Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence. Total unspent
                  deferred contribution and interest transferred was $688 (Schedule 3).

Note 7             EMPLOYEE FUTURE BENEFITS
                   The HQCA participates in the Local Authorities Pension Plan (LAPP), a multi-employer defined
                   benefit pension plan.

                   The HQCA accounts for this multi-employer pension plan on a defined contribution basis. The
                   HQCA is not responsible for future funding of the plan deficit other than through contribution
                   increases. Pension expense recorded in the financial statements is equivalent to the HQCA’s
                   annual contributions of $397 for the year ended March 31, 2025 (2024 - $388).

                   At December 31, 2024, the Local Authorities Pension Plan reported a surplus of $19,557,148 (2023
                   – surplus of $15,056,661).

                   The Supplementary Executive Retirement Plan (SERP) payable at year ended March 31, 2025 is
                   $53 (2024 - $43). The current year contribution related to this plan is $7 (2024 - $8). No payment
                   has been made to plan members at retirement in the current year.


Note 8             DEFERRED LEASE INDUCEMENTS
                   The HQCA received a lease inducement in the form of free rent relating to a lease renewal of the
                   premises effective April 1, 2024. This amount will be amortized on a straight-line basis over the
                   term of the related lease and the amortization is recognized as a reduction of rent expense.

                                                                              2025              2024

                        Lease inducements - rent free periods             $       36        $     18

                        Less accumulated amortization                             (6)             (2)

                                                                          $       30        $     16




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                               147
Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements
March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

Note 9             TANGIBLE CAPITAL ASSETS
                                                               2025                                       2024
                                                  Computer
                                    Office       Hardware &      Leasehold
                                  Equipment       Software     improvements             Total            Total


 Estimated useful life                10 years       5 years   Over term of the
                                                                    lease


 Historical Cost
 Beginning of year                $      402     $     1,349    $     1,013       $    2,764       $     2,803
 Additions                                  -             13               -              13                16
 Disposals, including write-
 downs                                      -              -               -                -             (55)
                                         402           1,362          1,013            2,777             2,764


 Accumulated Amortization
 Beginning of year                       363            925           1,013            2,301             2,146
 Amortization expense                     28            155                -             183               210
 Effect of disposals, including
 write-downs                                -              -               -                -             (55)
                                         391           1,080          1,013            2,484             2,301


 Net book value at March 31,
 2025                             $       11     $      282     $          -      $      293




 Net book value at March 31,
 2024                             $       39     $      424     $          -                       $       463




148                                                                               Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                       Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements
March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

Note 10             CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
                    Contractual obligations are obligations of the HQCA to others that will become liabilities in the
                    future when the terms of those contracts or agreements are met.

                    Estimated payment requirements for each of the next five years and thereafter are as follows:

                                             Year ended           Operating
                                              March 31             Lease

                                             2025 – 26        $          335
                                             2026 – 27                   335
                                             2027 – 28                   347
                                             2028 – 29                   358
                                             Thereafter             1,557
                                                              $     2,932


Note 11             ACCUMULATED OPERATING SURPLUS
                    Accumulated operating surplus is comprised of the following:

                                                                         2025                                      2024

                                     Investment in
                                        Tangible
                                         Capital
                                       Assets and           Internally          Unrestricted
                                       Purchased            Restricted            Surplus
                                      Intangibles(a)        Surplus(b)            (Deficit)        Total           Total




 Balance, April 1                    $       475        $      1,731           $         -     $   2,206       $        1,951

 Annual operating (deficit)
 surplus                                        -                    -              (566)           (566)                255

 Net investments in capital
 assets and intangible assets               (171)                    -                171                  -                -

 Transfers, prior year restricted               -             (1,731)               1,731                  -                -

 Transfers, current year
 restricted                                     -              1,336               (1,336)                 -                -

 Balance, March 31                   $       304        $      1,336           $         -     $   1,640       $        2,206




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                          149
Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements
March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

Note 11           ACCUMULATED OPERATING SURPLUS (CONT’D)
 (a)    Investment in tangible capital assets and intangible assets represents the net book value of internally funded
        tangible capital assets and intangibles assets. These assets are restricted and are not available for any other
        purpose.

 (b)    The internally restricted surplus represents amounts set aside by the Board for future purposes. Those amounts
        are not available for other purposes without the approval of the Board. Internally restricted surplus based on the
        annual work plan is summarized as follows:

                                                                       2025             2024

                 Assessing patient/ family/ provider           $
                 experience                                             469       $    1,252

                 Supporting Modernizing Alberta’s Primary
                 Care System                                            425              110

                 Monitoring                                             133              300

                 External reviews                                       105                 -

                 Health system improvement resources and
                 activities                                             204                69

                                                               $      1,336       $    1,731


Note 12           COMPARATIVE FIGURES
                  Certain 2024 figures have been reclassified, where necessary, to conform to the 2025 presentation.

Note 13           APPROVAL OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
                  The financial statements were approved by the HQCA Board of Directors on May 28, 2025.




150                                                                                    Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                              Financial Information




Schedule 1 – Expenses – Detailed by Object
Year ended March 31
(thousands of dollars)
                                                                      2025                           2024

                                                       Budget                    Actual             Actual

                                                       (Note 4)

Salaries and benefits                              $        5,437            $      5,328      $         5,104

Supplies, services and other                                3,846                   3,743                3,438

Amortization of tangible capital assets (Note 9)              178                     183                   210

Amortization of intangible capital assets                         -                       1                   -

                                                   $        9,461            $      9,255      $         8,752




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                  151
Financial Information




Schedule 2 – Salary and Benefits Disclosure
Year ended March 31
(thousands of dollars)
                                                                     2025                                   2024

                                                Base                      Other Non-
                                                           Other Cash       Cash
                                              Salary (1)   Benefits (2)   Benefits (3)       Total          Total



 Board of Directors-Chair                 $            -   $       29       $            $       29     $      20

 Board of Directors-Members                            -           50                            50            28

 Chief Executive Officer                            264             6              28           298           298

                                          $         264    $       85       $      28    $      377     $     346




 (1) Base salary includes pensionable base pay.

 (2) Other cash benefits include honoraria for board members, vehicle allowance. There were no vacation payouts
     or bonuses paid in 2025.

 (3) Other non-cash benefits include: employer’s portion of all employee benefits and contributions or payments
     made on behalf of employees, including pension, Supplementary Executive Retirement Plan, health care
     benefits, dental coverage, vision coverage, out of country medical benefits, group life insurance, accidental
     disability and dismemberment insurance, employee assistance program, Canadian Pension Plan, Employment
     Insurance and fair market value parking.




152                                                                                  Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                               Financial Information




Schedule 3 – Related Party Transactions
Year ended March 31
(thousands of dollars)
Related parties are those entities consolidated or accounted for on a modified equity basis in the Government of
Alberta’s Consolidated Financial Statements. Related parties also include key management personnel and close
family members of those individuals in the HQCA. The HQCA and its employees paid or collected certain taxes and
fees set by regulation for premiums, licenses, and other charges. These amounts were incurred in the normal course
of business, reflect charges applicable to all users, and have been excluded from this schedule.

The HQCA had the following transactions with related parties recorded in the Statement of Operations and the
Statement of Financial Position at the amount of consideration agreed upon between the related parties.

                                                                        2025               2024



             Revenues

                 Grants                                           $        8,570      $     8,850

                 Other                                                           -              26

                                                                  $        8,570      $     8,876

             Expenses

                 Other services                                   $             41    $       207



             Payable to related parties                           $            104    $     1,614



             Amount transferred to related parties                $            688    $           -




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                153
Financial Information




Financial Information


Table of Contents
         Department of Health ........................................................................................................................ 155
         Ministry of Health ................................................................................................................................ 161
         Public Interest Disclosure (Whistleblower Protection) Act .............................................. 162




154                                                                                                                           Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                         Financial Information



Department of Health
  Statement of Credit or Recovery (unaudited)
  Year ended March 31, 2025
  (in thousands)

                                                                                2025

                                                              Actual                      Total Amount
                                              Authorized     Revenue          Unearned     Received /       (Shortfall) /
                                              Spending      Recognized        Revenue      Receivable        Excess (1)

  Expense Amounts
  Ministry Support Services
      Strategic Corporate Support (a)        $      2,024   $       -     $         -    $        1,617    $         (407)
  Population and Public Health
      Research and Support Programs (b)             1,000           -               -               -             (1,000)
                                             $      3,024   $       -     $         -    $        1,617    $      (1,407)

  (a)   The Department receives revenue from the Department of Mental Health and Addiction to recover the cost of
        providing shared corporate services.
  (b)   The Department receives revenue from Health Canada to enhance existing health services to persons with chronic
        Hepatitis C virus infection.
  (1)   Shortfall is deducted from current year’s corresponding funding authority.




Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                          155
  Financial Information



Department of Health

Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited)
Year ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

   Expense Vote by Program                         Voted          Supplementary Adjustments           Voted           Voted            Expended/
   Operating Expense                             Estimate (1)      Estimate (2)      (3)
                                                                                                     Estimate        Actuals (4)   (Unexpended)


   1    Ministry Support Services
   1.1 Minister's Office                         $       1,225    $          -   $          -    $       1,225   $         1,203   $          (22)
   1.2 Deputy Minister's Office                          1,973               -              -            1,973             2,564             591
   1.3 Strategic Corporate Support
          and Policy Development                        57,721               -              -           57,721           96,589           38,868
   1.4 Health Advocates' Office                          3,569               -              -            3,569             2,673             (896)
                                                        64,488               -              -           64,488          103,029           38,541


   2   Health Entities (previously Alberta Health Services)
   2.1 Continuing Care                              1,263,803                -              -        1,263,803        1,278,768           14,965
   2.2 Community Care                                 1,827,081              -              -        1,827,081        1,849,241           22,160
   2.3 Home Care                                       859,820               -              -          859,820          903,627           43,807
   2.4 Acute Care                                     4,446,918              -       (137,502)       4,309,416        4,125,210          (184,206)
   2.5 Emergency Medical Services                      617,797               -              -          617,797          589,095           (28,702)
   2.6 Diagnostic and Therapeutic Services            2,433,051              -              -        2,433,051        2,483,152           50,101
   2.7 Population and Public Health                    386,570               -              -          386,570          389,735             3,165
   2.8 Health Workforce
          Education and Research                        83,328               -              -           83,328           84,568             1,240
   2.9 Information Technology                          454,702               -              -          454,702          457,054             2,352
   2.10 Administration and Support Services           2,387,752              -              -        2,387,752        2,290,617           (97,135)
   2.12 Health Quality Council of Alberta                 9,976              -              -            9,976             7,711           (2,265)
                                                     14,770,798              -       (137,502)   14,633,296      14,458,778              (174,518)


   3    Physician Compensation and Development
   3.1 Program Support                                  10,425               -              -           10,425           11,078              653
   3.2 Physician Services                             5,760,110              -              -        5,760,110        5,830,800           70,690
   3.3 Physician Education and Recruitment              452,490              -              -          452,490          375,765           (76,725)
                                                      6,223,025              -              -        6,223,025        6,217,643            (5,382)




  156                                                                                   Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                          Financial Information



Department of Health

Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited) (continued)
Year ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)
                                                                                         Adjusted                            Over
Expense Vote by Program                          Voted      Supplementary Adjustments     Voted          Voted             Expended/
                                                        (1)
Operating Expense                              Estimate      Estimate (2)      (3)
                                                                                         Estimate       Actuals (4)       (Unexpended)


4     Drugs and Supplemental Health Benefits
4.1 Program Support                            $    71,827 $           - $         - $     71,827 $         64,698 $            (7,129)
4.2 Outpatient Drugs                               480,000             -           -      480,000         473,859               (6,141)
4.3 Seniors Drug, Dental, Optical
        and Supplemental Health Benefits           882,441             -           -      882,441         961,608              79,167
4.4 Non-Group Drug
        and Supplemental Health Benefits           214,325             -           -      214,325         245,330              31,005
4.5 Assured Income for the Severely
        Handicapped Health Benefit                 260,902             -           -      260,902         269,673               8,771
4.6 Child Health Benefit                            25,897             -           -       25,897           21,634              (4,263)
4.7 Adult Health Benefit                           229,045             -           -      229,045         245,010              15,965
4.8 Alberta Aids to Daily Living                   219,750             -           -      219,750         211,628               (8,122)
4.9 Pharmaceutical Innovation and Management     157,980               -           -       157,980        198,974              40,994
                                               2,542,167               -           -     2,542,167      2,692,414             150,247
5     Primary Health Care
5.1 Program Support                                 10,806             -           -       10,806            9,111              (1,695)
5.2 Primary Health Care                            464,443       26,200            -      490,643         406,185              (84,458)
                                                   475,249       26,200            -      501,449         415,296              (86,153)
6     Population and Public Health
6.1 Program Support                                 30,783             -           -       30,783           25,661              (5,122)
6.2 Immunization Support                             4,121             -           -         4,121           5,186              1,065
6.3 Community-Based Health Services                182,347             -           -      182,347         148,650              (33,697)
6.4 Children's Health Supports                      15,000             -           -        15,000                    -        (15,000)
6.5 Health Innovation                               29,860             -           -        29,860          18,135             (11,725)
                                                   262,111             -           -      262,111         197,632              (64,479)
7     Continuing Care
7.1 Program Support                                   862              -           -          862              609               (253)
7.2 Continuing Care Programs                             -             -           -                -               -                  -
7.3 Accommodation Standards and Licensing           10,167             -           -       10,167            7,270              (2,897)
7.4 Palliative Care                                  5,000             -           -         5,000           3,996              (1,004)
                                                    16,029             -           -       16,029           11,875              (4,154)




    Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                          157
  Financial Information



Department of Health

Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited) (continued)
Year ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)
                                                                                                      Adjusted                                 Over
  Expense Vote by Program                               Voted        Supplementary Adjustments         Voted            Voted                Expended/
  Operating Expense                                   Estimate (1)    Estimate (2)      (3)
                                                                                                      Estimate         Actuals (4)       (Unexpended)


  8     Other Health Services
  8.1 Program Support                             $        16,940    $            -   $       -   $       16,940   $         8,630       $        (8,310)
  8.2 Allied Health Services                              160,448                 -           -         160,448            181,426               20,978
  8.3 Out-of-Province Health Care Services                138,702                 -           -         138,702            150,661               11,959
  8.4 Cancer Research
         and Prevention Investment                         25,852                 -           -           25,852            24,560                (1,292)
  8.5 Human Tissue and Blood Services                     268,232                 -           -         268,232            289,114               20,882
                                                          610,174                 -           -         610,174            654,391               44,217

  9     Information Technology
  9.1 Program Support                                      25,008                 -           -           25,008            27,234                2,226
  9.2 Development and Operations                          154,006                 -           -         154,006            118,786              (35,220)
                                                          179,014                 -           -         179,014            146,020              (32,994)


  Capital Payments to Related Parties
  2    Health Entities (previously Alberta Health Services)
  2.4 Acute Care                                         1,225                -           -                1,225                     -            (1,225)

  10 Infrastructure Support
  10.2 External Information                                  5,748            -           -                5,748             3,005                (2,743)
         Systems Development
  10.3 Medical Equipment Replacement
         and Upgrade Program                               30,000             -           -               30,000            30,000                    -
  10.4 Alberta Surgical Initiative
         Capital Program                                     4,135            -           -                4,135            16,225               12,090
  10.5 Rural Alberta Health
         Facilities Capital Program                        40,000             -           -               40,000            40,000                        -
  10.6 National Association of Pharmacy
         Regulatory Authorities Capital Program            11,000             -           -               11,000            11,000                        -
  10.7 Emergency Medical Services
         Vehicles Capital Program                          15,000             -           -              15,000             15,000                    -
  10.8 Beaverlodge Health Centre Replacement                  -               -           -                   -              6,000                6,000
                                                          105,883             -           -             105,883            121,230               15,347

  Total                                           $ 25,250,163       $     26,200 $ (137,502) $ 25,138,861 $ 25,018,308                  $     (120,553)
  Credit or Recovery (Shortfall)                             -                -       (1,407)       (1,407)           -                           1,407
                                                  $ 25,250,163       $     26,200 $ (138,909) $ 25,137,454 $ 25,018,308                  $     (119,146)
  (Lapse)/Encumbrance                                                                                                                    $     (119,146)




  158                                                                                     Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                    Financial Information



Department of Health

Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited) (continued)
Year ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)
                                                                                                    Adjusted                                Over
  Expense Vote by Program                              Voted        Supplementary Adjustments        Voted              Voted             Expended/
                                                     Estimate (1)    Estimate (2)      (3)
                                                                                                    Estimate           Actuals (4)       (Unexpended)
  Capital Investment Vote by Program
  Department Capital Acquisitions
  1 Ministry Support Services
  1.3 Strategic Corporate Support
         and Policy Development                  $            -     $        -    $      -      $            -     $         3,165 $           3,165
  6 Population and Public Health
  6.2 Immunization Support                                    -              -           -                   -                   32                32
  7 Continuing Care
  7.1 Program Support                                         635            -           -                   635                     -          (635)
  9 Information Technology
  9.2 Development and Operations                           22,480            -           -              22,480              10,489           (11,991)
  10 Infrastructure Support
  10.8 Beaverlodge Health Centre Replacement                6,700            -           -               6,700                   -            (6,700)
  Total                                          $         29,815 $          -    $      -      $       29,815 $            13,686 $         (16,129)
  (Lapse)/Encumbrance                                                                                                              $         (16,129)

  Financial Transactions Vote by Program
  Inventory Acquisition

  4 Drugs and Supplemental Health Benefits
  4.2 Outpatient Drugs                           $          9,000 $          -    $      -      $        9,000 $             7,310 $           (1,690)

  6 Population and Public Health
  6.2 Immunization Support                               150,196             -           -            150,196              105,774           (44,422)
  Total                                          $       159,196 $           -    $      -      $     159,196 $            113,084 $         (46,112)
  (Lapse)/Encumbrance                                                                                                              $         (46,112)

  Contingency Vote by Program
  2 Health Entities (previously Alberta Health Services)
  2.4 Acute Care                                 $            -     $        -    $ 522,058 $         522,058 $            522,058 $               -
  3 Physician Compensation and Development
  3.2 Physician Services                                      -              -      448,083           448,083              448,083                 -
  Total                                    $                  -     $        -    $ 970,141 $         970,141 $            970,141 $               -
  (Lapse)/Encumbrance                                                                                                              $               -




  Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                        159
Financial Information



Department of Health

Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited) (continued)
Year ended March 31, 2025
  (1) As per "Expense Vote by Program", "Capital Investment Vote by Program" and "Financial Transactions Vote by Program" pages 110 to 112

      of 2024-25 Government Estimates. Effective December 12, 2024, the responsibility for the administration of portion of Strategic Corporate
      Support and Policy Development, Program Support and Continuing Care Programs, and Continuing Care Beds were transferred to the
      Minister of Seniors, Community and Social Services (Order in Council 384/2024). The voted operating expense has been restated by
      ($422,392).
  (2) Per the Supplementary Supply Estimates approved on March 20, 2025.


  (3) Adjustments include encumbrances, capital carry over amounts, transfers between votes, credit or recovery increases approved by Treasury

      Board, and credit or recovery shortfalls. An encumbrance is incurred when, on a vote by vote basis, the total of actual disbursements in the
      prior year exceed the total adjusted estimate. All calculated encumbrances from the prior year are reflected as an adjustment to reduce the
      corresponding voted estimate in the current year.

      Adjustments also include supply vote transfers of $970,141 for "Contingency" as approved by the Lieutenant Governor in Council under the
      direction of the Minister of Finance (Order in Council 058/2025). The Contingency supply vote consists of a provisional funding authority
      transferable to any ministry. Upon approval by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, the President of Treasury Board and Minister of Finance
      may either spend or transfer all or a portion of this supply vote to another Minister for public emergencies, disasters or unanticipated costs.

  (4) Actuals exclude non-voted amounts such as amortization, inventory consumption, and valuation adjustments as no cash disbursement is

      required (non-cash amounts), or because the Legislative Assembly has already provided the funding authority pursuant to a statute other
      than an appropriation act.




160                                                                                            Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                           Financial Information



Department of Health

Statement of Remissions, Compromises and Write-offs (unaudited)
                                                                              2025                 2024
 Compromises:
       Fee for service recoveries                                         $          286       $          -
 Write-Offs:
       Medical Claim Recoveries                                                 1,973                 2,900
       Pharmaceuticals and Health Benefits                                        -                   3,220
       Other Receivables                                                          445                   498
 Total (1)                                                                $     2,704          $      6,618
 (1)
       There were no remissions during the year.

 The above statement has been prepared pursuant to Section 23 of the Financial Administration Act . The
 statement includes all remissions, compromises and write-offs made or approved during the fiscal year.



  Payments Based on Agreements (unaudited)

  The following has been prepared pursuant to Section 25(3) of the Financial Administration Act.

  The Department entered into agreements, under the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan, with other Provincial
  and Territorial Governments to provide health services on their behalf. The Department pays service providers
  for services rendered under the agreements and recovers the amount paid. Service providers include Alberta
  Health Services and physicians. The Department merely provides a service for another party and assumes no
  liability beyond that of completely discharging the role of being a conduit for funding. Costs based on these
  agreements are incurred by the Department under authority in Section 25 of the Financial Administration Act.
  Accounts receivable includes $48,737 (2024 - $56,750) relating to payments based on agreements.

  Amounts paid based on agreements are as follows:

                                                                              2025                 2024

Other Provincial and Territorial Governments                             $ 344,586            $ 344,034



Ministry of Health
  Trust Funds under Administration (unaudited)
  Year ended March 31, 2025
  (in thousands)

  Trust funds under administration are funds consisting of public money over which the Legislature has no
  power of appropriation. The Ministry has no equity in the funds and administers them for the purposes of
  various trusts and therefore they are not included in the consolidated financial statements.

  As at March 31, 2025, the balance of funds held in trust for Health Benefit Trust of Alberta was $365,295
  (2024 - $208,949) and for research and development, education, and other programs was $3,124 (2024 -
  $2,285).

  The Ministry and a third-party trustee administer the Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan in accordance
  with a retirement compensation arrangement trust agreement. As at March 31, 2025, there are $24,255 in
  plan assets (2024 - $25,176).



Health | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                              161
Financial Information




Annual Report Extracts and Other Statutory Reports

Public Interest Disclosure (Whistleblower Protection) Act
Section 32 of the Public Interest Disclosure (Whistleblower Protection) Act reads:

32(1) Every chief officer must prepare a report annually on all disclosures that have been made
      to the designated officer of the department, public entity or office of the Legislature for
      which the chief officer is responsible.
(2)   The report under subsection (1) must include the following information:
      (a) the number of disclosures received by the designated officer, the number of
      disclosures acted on and the number of disclosures not acted on by the designated
      officer;
      (b) the number of investigations commenced by the designated officer as a result of
      disclosures;
      (c) in the case of an investigation that results in a finding of wrongdoing, a description of
      the wrongdoing and any recommendations made or corrective measures taken in
      relation to the wrongdoing or the reasons why no corrective measure was taken.
      (3) The report under subsection (1) must be included in the annual report of the department,
      public entity or office of the Legislature if the annual report is made publicly available.

There were no disclosures of wrongdoing filed with my office, for your department, between April 1, 2024
and March 31, 2025




162                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
