Measuring up 137
#  buildingAlberta#  buildingAlberta
university degree. The denominator is the 
population of Aboriginal Albertans aged 
25–64. Post-secondary completion includes 
certificates and diplomas (university, vocational, 
trade, community college) and university 
degrees. Excluded from the survey’s coverage 
are persons living on reserves and other 
Aboriginal settlements in the provinces, full-
time members of the Canadian Forces and the 
institutionalized population.
25. Credit r ating
 S ource: Alberta is rated by three credit rating 
agencies; Standard and Poor’s Rating Services, 
Moody’s Investor Services and Dominion Bond 
Rating Service
 N
ote(s): Credit rating is an independent credit 
rating agency’s assessment of the future ability 
of an organization to repay its long-term debt. 
The highest possible rating is AAA. 
26. a lberta’s a ssets
 S ource: Net Assets on a Fiscal Plan Basis – 
Found in the GOA Annual Report, in the 
Executive Summary section on a table titled 
“Balance Sheet”
 N
et Assets on a Consolidated Financial 
Statement Basis – Found in the GOA Annual 
Report, Consolidated Financial Statements 
section on the “Consolidated Statement of 
Financial Position” table
 N
ote(s): Consolidated net assets reflect the 
province’s total assets less their total liabilities. 
A ‘net-asset’ position indicates that the province 
would be able to meet all current and long-term 
obligations given the value of their assets.
27. e conomic Diversity
 S ource: Statistics Canada, Gross domestic 
product (GDP) at basic prices, by North 
American Industry Classification System 
(NAICS), provinces and territories
 N
ote(s): Industries are grouped into sectors, 
and the total share for each sector is used 
to determine the top three sectors. Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) is the total market 
value of all goods and services produced 
during a given year. GDP is also referred to 
as economic output. T o avoid counting the 
same output more than once, GDP includes 
only final goods and services – not those 
that are used to make another product. The 
GDP indicators rely heavily on a wealth of 
information from various areas of Statistics 
Canada, from other federal departments 
and agencies, from provincial government 
departments and from private industry sources. 
This large amount of information is compiled, 
integrated and analysed as part of the complex 
process of arriving at GDP by industry.
28. i ndex of economic Well-Being
 S ource: Centre for the Study of Living 
Standards
 N
ote(s): The Index of Economic Well-Being 
(IEWB), developed by L. Osberg and A. 
Sharpe, is a mix of different approaches. The 
index covers simultaneously current prosperity 
(based on measures of consumption), 
sustainable accumulation, and social topics 
(reduction in inequalities and protection 
against “social” risks). Environmental issues 
are addressed by considering the costs of CO
2 
emissions per capita. Consumption flows 
and wealth accumulation (defined broadly 
to include research and development stock, 
a proxy for human capital, and the costs of 
CO
2 emissions) are evaluated according to 
National Accounts methodology. Inequality is 
monitored with a Gini index and a measure of 
poverty intensity (Sen-Shorrocks-Thon index). 
Finally, four key social risks are identified: 
unemployment, illness, single parent poverty 
and old-age poverty. 
29. T otal g reenhouse g as e missions
 S ource: Environment Canada. Canada’s 
Inventory can be found at:
 http:
//www.ec.gc.ca/ges-ghg/default.asp
Source
S
 and 
n
ote
S
, continued