MEASURING UP 127
SOURCES AND NOTES, continued
as economic output . T o avoid counting the 
same output more than once, GDP includes 
only final goods and services – not those 
that are used to make another product . The 
GDP indicators rely heavily on a wealth of 
information from various areas of Statistics 
Canada, from other federal departments 
and agencies, from provincial government 
departments and from private industry 
sources . This large amount of information is 
compiled, integrated and analysed as part of 
the complex process of arriving at GDP by 
industry .
29. Index of Economic Well-Being 
 Source: Centre for the Study of Living 
Standards 
 Note(s): The Index of Economic Well-Being, 
developed by L . Osberg and A . Sharpe, is a 
mix of different approaches . The index covers 
simultaneously current prosperity (based 
on measures of consumption), sustainable 
accumulation, and social topics (reduction 
in inequalities and protection against 
“social” risks) . Environmental issues are 
addressed by considering the costs of CO2 
emissions per capita . Consumption flows 
and wealth accumulation (defined broadly 
to include research and development stock, 
a proxy for human capital, and the costs of 
CO2 emissions) are evaluated according to 
National Accounts methodology . Inequality 
is monitored with a Gini index and a measure 
of poverty intensity (Sen-Shorrocks-Thon 
index) . Finally, four key social risks are 
identified: unemployment, illness, single 
parent poverty and old-age poverty .
30. Total Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
 Source: Environment Canada . Canada’s 
Inventory can be found at: http://www .ec .gc .
ca/ges-ghg/default .asp 
 Note(s): Results are based on the success 
in meeting the greenhouse gas emissions 
growth targets measured in million tonnes 
of CO2 equivalent, as outlined in Alberta’s 
2008 Climate Change Strategy . Alberta’s 
total emissions are reported in the National/
Provincial/T erritorial Tables . The United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC) held the nineteenth 
session of the Conference of the Parties (COP 
19) in November, 2013 . Through Decision 
24/COP 19 the UNFCCC adopted updated 
global warming potentials to normalize 
emissions of all the GHGs to a reference gas 
(CO2) in accordance with revised reporting 
guidelines, and implemented several 
methodological changes . The revised actual 
results are stated in the graph and revised 
targets for 2009 to 2012 are 236, 242, 248, 
and 253 million tonnes, respectively .
31. Air Quality Index 
 Source: Alberta Environmental Monitoring, 
Evaluation and Reporting Agency, Parkland 
Airshed Management Zone, Calgary Region 
Airshed Zone, Fort Air Partnership, Peace 
Airshed Zone Association, Palliser Airshed 
Society, Wood Buffalo Environmental 
Association and, Lakeland Industry and 
Community Association 
 Note(s): In 2014, the AQI was calculated 
hourly at 14 continuous monitoring stations: 
four in Edmonton, two each in Calgary 
and Fort McMurray and one each in Cold 
Lake, Fort Saskatchewan, Grande Prairie, 
Lethbridge, Medicine Hat, and Red Deer . 
New monitoring stations in Calgary and 
Red Deer did not report data for sufficient 
portions of the year to be included in 2014 
results . Air quality is measured based on 
five major pollutants: carbon monoxide, 
nitrogen dioxide, ozone, sulphur dioxide 
and fine particulate matter – 2 .5 microns in 
size (PM2 .5) . This initiative is part of the 
National Air Pollution Surveillance Program 
being implemented across Canada . 2014 
results are based on data from fourteen 
stations (includes Calgary Central, Calgary 
Northwest, Cold Lake South, Crescent 
Heights, Edmonton Central, Edmonton 
East, Edmonton South, Fort McMurray – 
Athabasca Valley, Fort McMurray – Patricia 
McInnes, Fort Saskatchewan, Henry Pirker, 