Email sent
Ministry of Jobs, Economy and Trade, Government of Alberta | Jobs, Economy and Trade Annual
Report 2024 –2025

©2025 Government of Alberta | Published: June 2025
ISBN 978-1-4601-6313-9
ISSN 2818-4025

This publication is issued under the Open Government Licence – Alberta
(http://open.alberta.ca/licence).

Note to Readers: Copies of the annual report are available on the Alberta Open Government Portal
website, at https://open.alberta.ca/publications/2818-4025


i                                                      Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                                                                  Introduction




Table of Contents

Preface ........................................................................................................................................................ 2

Minister’s Accountability Statement .............................................................................................. 3

Message from the Minister ................................................................................................................. 4

Management’s Responsibility for Reporting .............................................................................. 6

Results Analysis ..................................................................................................................................... 9
      Ministry Overview ......................................................................................................................................... 10
      Discussion and Analysis of Results .................................................................................................... 18
      Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology ..................................................................... 72

Financial Information ......................................................................................................................... 78
      Reporting Entity and Method Consolidation ................................................................................... 79
      Ministry Financial Highlights ................................................................................................................... 80

Annual Report Extracts and Other Statutory Reports....................................................... 142
      Statutes of Alberta Chapter P-39.5 – Public Interest Disclosure (Whistleblower
      Protection) Act ............................................................................................................................................. 142




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                                                                                           1
Introduction




Preface

The Public Accounts of Alberta are prepared in accordance with the Financial Administration Act
and the Sustainable Fiscal Planning and Reporting Act. The Public Accounts consist of the annual
report of the Government of Alberta and the annual reports of each ministry.

The 2024-25 Annual Report reflects the 2024-27 Ministry business plans, the Government of
Alberta Strategic Plan, as well as the ministry’s activities and accomplishments during the 2024-25
fiscal year, which ended on March 31, 2025.

The Annual Report of the Government of Alberta contains Budget 2024 Key Results, the audited
Consolidated Financial Statements and Performance Results, which compares actual performance
results to desired results set out in the government’s strategic plan.

This annual report of the Ministry of Jobs, Economy and Trade contains the Minister’s
Accountability Statement, the ministry’s Financial Information and Results Analysis, a comparison
of actual performance results to desired results set out in the Ministry Business Plan. This ministry
annual report also includes:

         •     the financial statements of the Workers’ Compensation Board – Alberta (WCB); and

         •     other financial information as required by the Financial Administration Act and
               Sustainable Fiscal Planning and Reporting Act, as separate reports, to the extent that the
               ministry has anything to report.
All ministry annual reports should be considered along with the Government of Alberta annual
report to provide a complete overview of government’s commitment to openness, accountability
and fiscal transparency.




2                                                            Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                         Introduction




Minister’s Accountability Statement

The ministry’s annual report for the year ended March 31, 2025, was prepared under my direction
in accordance with the Sustainable Fiscal Planning and Reporting Act and the government’s
accounting policies. All of the government’s policy decisions as at June 3, 2025 with material
economic or fiscal implications of which I am aware have been considered in the preparation of this
report.



[Original signed by]

Honourable Joseph Schow
Minister of Jobs, Economy, Trade and Immigration




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                  3
Introduction




Message from the Minister

                                Alberta’s government continued to foster the conditions for
                                growth during the 2024-25 fiscal year, creating jobs and economic
                                opportunities for Albertans while ensuring business, investment
                                and trade could thrive.

                                Jobs, Economy and Trade’s efforts to support Alberta families and
                                businesses helped to ensure our province remained the best place
                                to live, work, invest and raise a family. I am honoured to serve as
                                the minister and am proud of the ministry’s achievements during
                                the past fiscal year.

                                  Ensuring Alberta’s economy prospered was a key outcome for the
                                  ministry. Promoting trade opportunities and enhancing our
province’s access to new and emerging markets supported this outcome. This became especially
critical following the administration change in the United States in early 2025 and the uncertainty
generated by that administration’s actions. Alberta’s government must take the threat of tariffs
seriously and be realistic about how we respond to and manage them. It was essential the ministry
continued to seek new markets and trading partners so it is better positioned to withstand external
shocks and ensure long-term prosperity.

To this end, the ministry led trade missions to the United Kingdom, Argentina, the United Arab
Emirates, Indonesia, the Philippines and Germany. The missions included networking with industry
and government leaders from around the world, building relationships and telling Alberta’s story
about why our province is a great place to invest, or establish a facility or business. The missions
also helped Alberta’s exporters meet with potential international customers and find new markets
for their products and services. The ministry also continued to coordinate our government’s
engagement in international trade negotiations to ensure our province’s interests were
represented.

Encouraging investment and supporting business growth is another way the ministry helped
ensure Alberta’s economy continued to prosper. Through the Investment and Growth Fund, the
ministry supported four projects that will create an estimated 261 full time and 445 temporary
jobs. The fund leveraged an astonishing $29 in private investment for every $1 in program funding.
For example, the fund supported Lufthansa Technik Canada’s state-of-the-art aircraft maintenance
and repair facility at the Calgary International Airport. The ministry also provided concierge
services that helped potential investors choose Alberta and, in April 2024, launched the Site
Selector Tool. This tool gives businesses and investors key data they need to make informed
decisions about where to invest, expand or start a business.

Jobs, Economy and Trade also supported economic growth and diversification by investing in
Alberta’s film and television industry through the Film and Television Tax Credit program. Changes
were made to the program to reduce red tape, make it easier for productions to apply, and
encourage filming in diverse parts of the province, including rural Alberta. Finally, the ministry
provided a record number and value of Northern and Regional Economic Development grants to
organizations to assist economic growth in all corners of the province.

A prosperous economy requires a skilled and resilient labour force. Jobs, Economy and Trade
supported Albertans by providing training and re-training programs and attracting workers in
areas of labour shortages and high demand. The Alberta is Calling Moving Bonus will support up to



4                                                       Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                             Introduction



2,000 workers in select occupations who moved to Alberta in 2024 through a refundable tax credit.
The ministry also looked ahead to future labour needs by creating and releasing a 10-year
occupational outlook to give employers, workers and educators the vital information they need.
Alberta’s government also supported Alberta’s north through the Northern Alberta Development
Bursary program, which provided financial assistance to students in select occupations who
commit to working in northern Alberta once they graduate.

In addition to having a skilled labour force, Alberta’s government is committed to ensuring
Albertans are working in safe, fair and healthy workplaces. Jobs, Economy and Trade continued to
update the Occupational Health and Safety Code to ensure workplace health and safety rules keep
pace with changing workplaces, best practices and technology. Changes went into effect for
portions of the code dealing with harassment and violence, explosives and gas and oil wells, along
with administrative changes to correct errors and align standards. The ministry was able to
complete more health and safety inspections this year, which helps employers and workers ensure
they are in compliance with the rules. Finally, the ministry continued to provide education
resources for employers and workers, some of which are available in multiple languages.

Jobs, Economy and Trade also continued to resolve employment standards complaints in a timely
manner and reduced the time to resolve complaints despite an increase in complaint volume during
2024-25. The ministry worked with other provincial ministries, agencies and federal organizations
to address human trafficking and ensure workers are not being exploited. On the workers’
compensation front, the ministry was pleased to bring forward a regulation that made wildland
firefighters eligible for the Alberta Heroes’ Fund for First Responders (Heroes’ Fund). The Heroes’
Fund provides a one-time, tax-free payment of $100,000 to eligible families of first responders who
lose their lives as a result of their duties. While the payment cannot bring back their loved ones, it
may help ease the burdens for families of fallen wildland firefighters.

In 2024-25, the ministry continued to support high-quality, inclusive and affordable child care for
Alberta families. This empowered parents and caregivers to participate in training, pursue an
education or enter the workforce to improve their economic well-being. The ministry saw increases
in the number of licensed spaces and child care providers, which created more opportunities for
families to access quality, affordable child care. This past year marked the first full year of advanced
payments to child care providers to relieve financial pressures. The ministry also launched the
Inclusive Spaces Program Grant to support licensed child care providers to create more spaces for
children with developmental or cultural needs and the Building Blocks Capital Grant to help with
the creation of new child care spaces. Finally, the ministry took steps to implement a flat $15 per
day, per child, fee that came into effect on April 1, 2025.

I am proud of Jobs, Economy and Trade’s achievements in 2024-25 and the role the ministry played
in advancing the Alberta advantage. I look forward to continuing the ministry’s work to foster
economic growth, further diversify our economy, create jobs and economic opportunities for
Alberta families.


[Original signed by]

Honourable Joseph Schow
Minister of Jobs, Economy, Trade and Immigration




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                      5
Introduction




Management’s Responsibility for Reporting

The Ministry of Jobs, Economy and Trade includes:

       •   The Department of Jobs, Economy and Trade;
       •   Workers’ Compensation Board – Alberta;
       •   Northern Alberta Development Council;
       •   Alberta Labour Relations Board; and
       •   Appeals Commission for Alberta Workers’ Compensation.

The executives of the individual entities within the ministry have the primary responsibility and
accountability for the respective entities. Collectively, the executives ensure the ministry complies
with all relevant legislation, regulations and policies.

Ministry business plans, annual reports, performance results and the supporting management
information are integral to the government’s fiscal and strategic plan, annual report, quarterly
reports, and other financial and performance reporting.

Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the accompanying ministry financial information
and performance results for the ministry rests with the Minister of Jobs, Economy, Trade and
Immigration. Under the direction of the Minister, I oversee the preparation of the ministry’s annual
report, which includes the financial information, performance results on all objectives and
initiatives identified in the Ministry Business Plan and performance results for all ministry-
supported commitments that were included in the 2024-27 Government of Alberta Strategic Plan.
The financial information and performance results, out of necessity, include amounts that are based
on estimates and judgments. The financial information is prepared using the government’s stated
accounting policies, which are based on Canadian public sector accounting standards. The
performance measures are prepared in accordance with the following criteria:

       •   Reliable – information used in applying performance measure methodologies agrees with
           the underlying source data for the current and prior years’ results.
       •   Understandable – the performance measure methodologies and results are presented
           clearly.
       •   Comparable – the methodologies for performance measure preparation are applied
           consistently for the current and prior years’ results.
       •   Complete – outcomes, performance measures and related targets match those included in
           the ministry’s Budget 2024.
As Deputy Minister, in addition to program responsibilities, I am responsible for the ministry’s
financial administration and reporting functions. The ministry maintains systems of financial
management and internal control which give consideration to costs, benefits and risks that are
designed to:
       •   provide reasonable assurance that transactions are properly authorized, executed in
           accordance with prescribed legislation and regulations and properly recorded so as to
           maintain accountability of public money;
       •   provide information to manage and report on performance;
       •   safeguard the assets and properties of the province under ministry administration;


6                                                         Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                               Introduction



      •   provide Executive Council, the President of Treasury Board and Minister of Finance and
          the Minister of Jobs, Economy, Trade and Immigration the information needed to fulfill
          their responsibilities; and
      •   facilitate preparation of Ministry business plans and annual reports required under the
          Sustainable Fiscal Planning and Transparency Act.
In fulfilling my responsibilities, I have relied, as necessary, on the executives of the individual
entities within the ministry.



[Original signed by]

Christopher McPherson
Deputy Minister of Jobs, Economy, Trade and Immigration
June 3, 2025




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                        7
Results Analysis




8                  Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                                                          Results Analysis




Results Analysis

Table of Contents
    Ministry Overview ......................................................................................................................................... 10
   i.     Organizational Structure .................................................................................................................... 10
  ii.     Key Highlights ......................................................................................................................................... 15
 iii.     Key Highlights – Financial Results.................................................................................................. 17
    Discussion and Analysis of Results......................................................................................................... 18
  iv.     Actions that support the priorities of the Government of Alberta Strategic Plan....... 18
   v.     Outcome One: Alberta’s economy is prospering....................................................................... 19
  vi.     Outcome Two: Alberta has a skilled and resilient labour force. ........................................ 34
 vii.     Outcome Three: Albertans are safe at work and treated fairly in the workplace....... 42
viii.     Outcome Four: Parents and guardians have access to high-quality, inclusive and
          affordable early learning and child care options ...................................................................... 62
    Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology......................................................................... 72




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                                                                                       9
Results Analysis




Ministry Overview

Organizational Structure
The Ministry of Jobs, Economy and Trade enhances Alberta’s competitive advantage by creating the
conditions to help more Albertans prosper. This includes delivering policies and programs that
enhance trade and economic development to grow and diversify the economy; attracting and
developing a highly skilled workforce; promoting safe, fair and healthy workplaces; streamlining
services for workers, investors and employers; and ensuring high quality and affordable child care
is available to all Albertans. The ministry’s agencies, boards and commissions provide independent
and impartial interpretation of Alberta’s labour laws; support a sustainable workers’ compensation
system through delivery of independent adjudication services; and support Northern Alberta
communities in strengthening their diverse economies.




10                                                     Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Results Analysis



Department of Jobs, Economy and Trade

The Department of Jobs, Economy and Trade consists of the areas described below:

Deputy Minister’s Office
The Deputy Minister’s Office leads the department, provides advice and support to the minister and
is the link to the Minister’s Office. It ensures the work of the department meets the goals and
objectives outlined in the business plan and the priorities provided to the minister by the Premier.
The Deputy Minister’s Office also oversees operations and program delivery for the department.
The Deputy Minister supports the Deputy Minister of Executive Council by contributing to policy
development, planning and implementing cross-ministry initiatives, in addition to advocating for
new ways to achieve government-wide goals.

Economic Development and Business Supports
The Economic Development and Business Supports division is focused on driving and
operationalizing the Government of Alberta’s regional economic development agenda through
policies, strategies and programs that foster regional economic development and support the
vibrancy of small business. The division supports the Parliamentary Secretary for Small Business
and Northern Development, the Northern Development Ministers’ Forum and is secretariat for the
Northern Alberta Development Council. The division works with partner organizations, like
Business Link and Futurpreneur, to connect small businesses and entrepreneurs to the advice,
programs and funding they need to help them start, grow or succeed. Department programming
includes Biz Connect, a pathfinding service that provides information and referrals to organizations
that give advice and coaching, financing, training and information to help small businesses start,
grow and succeed. The Northern Alberta Development Bursary program provides bursaries that
help to build strong and resilient communities in Alberta’s north. The Northern and Regional
Economic Development program provides grants to municipalities, Indigenous communities and
not-for-profits with an economic development mandate. The division also delivers the Film and
Television Tax Credit program and other grants and programs that support regional economic
development, diversification and growth.

Economic Strategy and Investment
The Economic Strategy and Investment division is focused on ensuring that the Government of
Alberta’s strategies and policies support economic growth and job-creating investment. The
division plays a key role in ensuring Alberta remains an attractive and highly competitive
investment environment for sectors across the economy. The division engages with industry, other
levels of government and partners in the investment ecosystem to inform strategies, policies and
initiatives that support Alberta’s future prosperity and builds strategic capacity and alignment
across investment policy. It also coordinates high-value economic development, providing
pathfinding and concierge services to investors. The division also undertakes economic modelling
and data analytics to identify sectoral and regional opportunities, estimate economic impacts and
guide thinking regarding future strategies and policies for Alberta, informing the work of multiple
departments across government. Further, the division publishes accessible and timely economic
data to support private sector investment decision making and the economic development work of
agencies across the province. The division also develops and delivers mandated economic and
industry-focused strategies and policies designed to encourage the growth of priority sectors. The
division delivers the Investment and Growth Fund to encourage high-value private investments
that create jobs and grow the economy.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                  11
Results Analysis



International Trade
The International Trade division supports a government-wide approach to promoting trade and
defending and advancing Alberta’s trade interests. Core division functions include enhancing
Alberta’s trade market access in collaboration with partner ministries; delivering programs and
services to help Alberta businesses diversify into new international markets; engaging key
stakeholders, including businesses and other governments, to promote and support export
expansion; and advancing and defending Alberta’s interests with the federal government in the
negotiation, implementation and ongoing management of international trade agreements. The
division provides comprehensive support to the Minister with respect to trade. This ensures
responsiveness within the trade ecosystem to create a streamlined approach and enable the
implementation of priorities to enhance trade activities for Alberta companies, associations, the
Government of Alberta and international stakeholders. The division is actively involved in
supporting inbound delegations and outbound missions, participating in trade policy negotiations
and related issues, as well as providing program and operational support.

Effective April 1, 2025, the Internal Trade unit moved from Executive Council to the Ministry of
Jobs, Economy and Trade to consolidate responsibilities for trade.

Labour and Workforce Strategies
The Labour and Workforce Strategies division develops workplace laws and policies, as well as
supports the resolution of labour disputes, providing mediators and arbitrators to assist unions and
employers in resolving disputes. Additionally, the division informs and delivers employment and
training programming supports for workers and employers. The division develops policies and
strategies to align labour supply and demand and to ensure Alberta’s workplaces are safe and
healthy and operate within a fair legislative framework. Labour and Workforce Strategies plays a
key role in preparing Alberta’s workforce for the future. The division further contributes by
analyzing economic and labour trends, investigating emerging labour market issues and utilizing
labour market data to forecast future conditions and inform policy decisions. The division develops
forward-looking policies and programs to equip the workforce with emerging skills aligned to
future labour market needs. In collaboration with other provincial departments and the federal
government, the division coordinates labour market programming, including overseeing the
implementation of provincial Labour Market Transfer Agreements and monitoring the labour
market to adjust programming as needed. The division also provides the ministry’s legislative
services, public accountability functions and corporate services for facilities and administration,
emergency management and business continuity.

Safe, Fair and Healthy Workplaces
The Safe, Fair and Healthy Workplaces division enables safe, fair and healthy workplaces by using
evidence to inform prevention, education and enforcement activities. The division collaborates with
employers, workers, industry associations and labour groups to promote an informed and
knowledgeable workforce regarding shared workplace rights and responsibilities. The division is
also responsible for monitoring compliance with Employment Standards and Occupational
Health and Safety legislation using risk-based approaches and responding to complaints,
incidents and injuries. In addition, the division has established a prevention framework to align
health and safety system resources, leading to a reduction of injuries and illnesses within Alberta
workplaces.




12                                                       Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Results Analysis



Child Care Strategy and Policy
The Child Care Strategy and Policy division is responsible for leading the transformation of
Alberta’s early learning and child care system. This includes the development of strategic and
program policy to inform the delivery of child care programs and supports. Further, the division
implements initiatives that support and advance early childhood development priorities in
alignment with the Canada-Alberta Canada-Wide Early Learning and Child Care Agreement and
Canada-Alberta Early Learning and Child Care Agreement. The Child Care Strategy and Policy
division also oversees early childhood educator (ECE) certification to support the recruitment and
retention of a qualified workforce.

Effective May 16, 2025, the Child Care Strategy and Policy division moved from the Ministry of Jobs,
Economy and Trade to the Ministry of Education and Childcare.

Child Care Delivery
The Child Care Delivery division oversees the licensing and monitoring of child care programs
regulated under the Early Learning and Child Care Act and provides a range of funding supports to
the child care sector. This includes providing funding to licensed child care programs to enable
affordable child care for families, providing wage top-ups and professional development supports
for early childhood educators and administering the Child Care Subsidy Program to further reduce
child care costs for eligible families.

Effective May 16, 2025, the Child Care Delivery division moved from the Ministry of Jobs, Economy
and Trade to the Ministry of Education and Childcare.

Financial Services
The Financial Services division leads the development of the ministry’s budget and provides
financial advice and support related to planning and forecasting. It oversees the preparation and
implementation of ministry financial statements, financial compliance and accountability, contract
and grant management policy, as well as financial processes and policies.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                  13
Results Analysis



Agencies, Boards and Commissions

The Ministry of Jobs, Economy and Trade includes the following agencies, boards and commissions:

Alberta Labour Relations Board
The Alberta Labour Relations Board is an independent and impartial tribunal responsible for the
day-to-day interpretation and application of Alberta’s collective bargaining laws. The Board
administers the Labour Relations Code, the Public Service Employee Relations Act, the Police Officers
Collective Bargaining Act and certain matters under the Public Education Collective Bargaining Act.
The Alberta Labour Relations Board also hears appeals under the Occupational Health and Safety
(OHS) Act and Employment Standards Code and adjudicates remedies for reprisals under the Public
Interest Disclosure (Whistleblower Protection) Act. The Board processes applications and conducts
hearings on matters arising from both the private and public sectors.

Appeals Commission for Alberta Workers’ Compensation
The Appeals Commission for Alberta Workers’ Compensation consists of an independent tribunal
that is the final level of appeal for the Workers’ Compensation Board (WCB) and two independent
programs: the Advisor Office, which provides free-of-charge advice and advocacy services to
workers and employers in Alberta, and the Medical Panels Program, which convenes medical
professionals to answer medical questions posed by the Appeals Commission or WCB. All
components of the Appeals Commission are supported by an internal Secretariat which provides
shared services and supports cost savings. The Appeals Commission is committed to a fair,
client-focused appeal experience. The Appeals Commission’s mission is to understand its clients’
needs, offer them user-friendly resources and guide them through the appeal process, while
creating a safe and respectful place to be heard. It provides clear, timely, independent and unbiased
decisions from the Appeals Commission, advice and representation from the Advisor Office and
reports from the Medical Panels Program.

Northern Alberta Development Council
The Northern Alberta Development Council identifies, promotes and advises on practical measures
to advance economic and social development in northern Alberta. It provides a northern lens on
existing and proposed government services and programs, while facilitating opportunities for
stakeholders to connect and collaborate on northern issues of common interest.

Workers’ Compensation Board – Alberta
The Workers’ Compensation Board – Alberta (WCB) is an employer-funded, non-profit organization
legislated to administer the workers’ compensation system for the province’s employers. The WCB
is an independently-funded entity that is accountable to the Minister of Jobs, Economy and Trade
and operates as an insurance enterprise. In Canada, workers’ compensation is a no-fault disability
insurance system that protects both employers and workers against the economic impact of work-
related injuries and occupational disease.




14                                                       Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



Key Highlights
The Ministry of Jobs, Economy and Trade focused on accomplishing four outcomes identified in the
2024-27 Ministry Business Plan:

        •    Alberta’s economy is prospering.

        •    Alberta has a skilled and resilient labour force.

        •    Albertans are safe at work and treated fairly in the workplace.

        •    Parents and guardians have access to high quality, inclusive and affordable early
             learning and child care options.

Key highlights and results achieved by the Ministry of Jobs, Economy and Trade in 2024-25 include:

        •    Working in collaboration with Lufthansa Technik Canada, the department successfully
             provided investment concierge services, contributing to a positive final investment
             decision. In February 2025, Lufthansa Technik Canada announced a new $120 million
             aerospace maintenance facility at the Calgary airport, which will create up to 160
             permanent jobs and 170 construction jobs. The investment was a key catalyst for
             WestJet to enter into a 15-year, multi-billion-dollar maintenance contract with
             Lufthansa Technik Canada.
        •    The department developed and launched the Alberta Site Selector Tool, an online
             service that helps businesses and investors find and evaluate suitable properties to
             expand or locate their business in communities across Alberta by consolidating regional
             socio-economic data, the location of relevant infrastructure and property listings. This
             tool supports the department’s strong focus on job creation, investment attraction and
             economic diversification as well as our mandate to enhance pathfinding services and
             other business-attraction initiatives.
        •    Alberta businesses, municipalities, Indigenous communities and industry associations
             were supported through the Alberta Export Expansion Program, where 344
             applications for grants, from 195 organizations, were approved in 2024-25. This
             program provided more than $985,000 in 2024-25 to help these organizations access
             international markets and attract global buyers.
        •    The department led 28 international trade missions for companies across the province.
             Alberta companies and trade-related organizations participated in over 450
             engagements, with an average of 16 companies per mission. They benefited from
             targeted business-to-business meetings, information sessions and networking
             opportunities.
        •    The Northern Regional Economic Development program provided $9.8 million in
             funding to support 81 projects that will drive economic development and diversification
             in communities across the province.
        •    The department developed and opened an online application portal for the Alberta is
             Calling Moving Bonus. This is a one-time, $5,000 refundable tax credit to attract
             out-of-province workers to Alberta by offsetting the costs associated with relocation.
             The $10 million budgeted will support up to 2,000 skilled tradespeople who moved to
             Alberta between May 1 and December 31, 2024.
        •    The Alberta Industry Skills grant invested $5.2 million in industry-led training projects
             that aim to equip more than 850 Albertans with in-demand skills for high growth
             sectors, including aviation and aerospace, construction and technology.


Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                    15
Results Analysis



        •    The department conducted 10,947 occupational health and safely inspections and 6,545
             re-inspections, compared to 9,801 inspections and 5,975 re-inspections in 2023-24, as
             part of an evidence-based compliance approach in support of safe, fair and healthy
             workplaces.
        •    Child care fees were reduced to an average of $15 a day, enabling greater workforce
             participation and economic engagement for families. Child care capacity was expanded
             across Alberta, reaching approximately 2,700 licensed programs and approximately
             142,600 total spaces for children up to kindergarten age.
        •    Alberta’s early childhood educator (ECE) workforce was strenghtened by supporting
             the growing demand for high-quality child care, with approximately 3,000 newly
             certified ECEs, bringing the total to about 28,500 ECEs across the province.
        •    The department, including its agencies, boards and commissions, has reduced its
             regulatory requirements by 44.7 per cent since the red tape reduction initiative began
             in May 2019. This result exceeds the target of 33 per cent.

The Ministry of Jobs, Economy and Trade remains committed to regulatory approaches and
program delivery that reduces unnecessary government oversight and emphasizes outcomes, to
improve access to government services, attract investment, support innovation and
competitiveness and grow Alberta businesses.




16                                                      Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                           Results Analysis



Key Highlights – Financial Results
In 2024-25, the ministry’s consolidated expense was $1,860 million, $303 million higher than
2023-24 and $1.2 million lower than budgeted.

        •    $94 million for Workforce Strategies, including $14.4 million for the Canada-Alberta Job
             Grant resulting in more than 6,508 Albertans approved for training; $25.3 million for
             Training for Work, which supported approximately 4000 Albertans; and $5.1 million for
             the Aviation Skills Grant to help workers gain new skills and support employers to
             develop the workforce they need to grow their businesses.
        •    $68 million for Safe, Fair and Healthy Workplaces, including approximately $52.3
             million for the occupational health and safety program, where 10,947 inspections and
             6,545 re­inspections were conducted and over 14,454 OHS orders were issued; and
             $12.8 million for the employment standards program, where 87 per cent of the
             approximately 5,008 complaints received were completed within 180 days.
        •    $119 million for Economic Development and Trade, including $55.3 million for the Film
             and Television Tax Credit supporting 34 productions; $9.8 million for the Northern and
             Regional Economic Development program supporting 81 projects throughout Alberta;
             and $4.2 million for the Investment and Growth Fund to support projects that will
             contribute to job creation and capital investment in sectors across the province.
        •    $1,558 million for Child Care, including $797 million in affordability grants were
             provided to licensed childcare providers to reduce childcare fees for children enrolled
             in child care spaces in daycare facilities, family day homes and preschools; and $194
             million in child care subsidies helping to offset the cost of care for the families of 67,500
             children. The additional amount was used to fund several areas within child care,
             including professional development, space creation grants and wage top-ups, among
             other supports.
        •    $18.4 million for the Appeals Commission for Alberta Workers' Compensation. 782
             appeals were received and the average number of days from the hearing to the decision
             issued date was 24.
        •    $4.8 million for the Alberta Labour Relations Board. The Board received 734
             applications and conducted 791 hearings during the year.

In 2024-25, the ministry's revenue was $1,347 million, $264 million higher than 2023-24 and $63
million higher than budgeted.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                       17
Results Analysis




Discussion and Analysis of Results
Actions that support the priorities of the Government of Alberta Strategic Plan

 Key Priority one: Boosting Alberta’s Advantage
 Objective one: Growing Alberta’s advantage
 Action: Addressing Alberta’s labour shortages through initiatives such as the Alberta is Calling
 Attraction Bonus. The attraction bonus will provide a one-time payment for eligible workers to
 relocate to Alberta to work in the skilled trades and promote Alberta as a destination of choice
 for skilled talent from both domestic and international markets.

 Objective two: Connecting Albertans to jobs
 Action: Increasing access to safe, affordable, high-quality childcare. In 2024-25 the government
 is supporting the creation of more than 15,300 licensed child care spaces through a mix of
 private (for-profit) and not-for-profit providers in areas where they are most needed. Alberta’s
 government is also meeting the growing demand for skilled early childhood educators through
 certification and professional development, promoting early learning and child care as viable
 career choices.

 Objective three: Strengthening economic activity and attracting investment
 Action: Making Alberta one of the top 10 petrochemical producers in the world through private
 sector investment. Dow is investing nearly $9 billion in Alberta through the Path2Zero project,
 which will supply certified low- to zero-carbon emissions polyethylene and ethylene derivatives
 to customers around the globe. This is one of the largest private sector investments in the
 province’s history and will create 6,000 jobs during peak construction and about 400 to 500
 full-time jobs when fully operational.

 Action: Growing Alberta’s film and television industry and securing Alberta’s position as a
 filmmaking production hub through targeted incentives, including the Alberta Made Production
 Grant, which covers 25 per cent of eligible Alberta production costs to a maximum of $125,000,
 and the Training and Mentorship Incentive which provides an additional top-up of up to $35,000
 for training and mentorship, as well as the Film and Television Tax Credit. For every dollar of
 government support towards a production, the industry generates four dollars of investment
 back into the province.

 Action: Enhancing Alberta’s trade and expanding exports through the Alberta Export Expansion
 Program (AEEP), by delivering funding to help export-ready companies and non-profit
 organizations enhance access to international markets and attract global buyers. In 2023-24,
 approximately 200 Alberta businesses, municipalities, Indigenous communities, and industry
 associations were supported through AEEP to access international markets and attract global
 buyers.

 Detailed reporting found on pages 21, 22-23, 27, 34, 65-66, 68-69




18                                                        Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Results Analysis



Outcome One: Alberta’s economy is prospering
The ministry creates the conditions where business, investment and trade can thrive, creating jobs
and economic opportunity for Albertans. Streamlining services enhances Alberta’s competitive
advantage and supports economic growth. It also protects workers, reduces regulatory burden and
promotes ease of access to services for Albertans and businesses.

Key Objectives

1.1 Engage key stakeholders to promote and support investment attraction efforts, deliver
programs and tailored services for prospective investors and ensure Alberta is a highly
competitive destination.

Investment Competitiveness

Amid significant global economic uncertainty, particularly from rapidly evolving U.S. tariffs, the
department plays a critical role in supporting Alberta’s investment competitiveness. By providing
detailed analysis of U.S. economic policy changes and their implications for Alberta’s economy, the
department delivers essential insights that help government and industry navigate heightened
risks to investor confidence. To ensure these insights are relevant and actionable, the department
collaborates closely with industry stakeholders, notably through the Alberta Trade Advisory
Council, aligning the department's analysis with current industry perspectives. This proactive
approach enables Alberta to respond effectively to global uncertainty, maintain its competitive edge
and attract investment even as external conditions remain volatile.

The department is advancing Alberta’s investment competitiveness by supporting initiatives to
enhance the movement of goods, a key driver of economic growth.

        •    An initiative central to these efforts is the $3 million grant committed to the
             Opportunity Calgary Investment Fund Ltd. in March 2024 to support the creation of a
             transportation and logistics centre of excellence in Calgary and associated programming
             through to March 2029. This proposed hub will bring together industry leaders,
             technology companies, service providers, government and academia to collaborate on
             technological adoption, market expansion and supply chain optimization.
        •    Alberta’s government continues to champion trade and economic activity-enabling
             infrastructure for Alberta through formal Memorandum of Understanding agreements
             with the Port of Vancouver and Port of Prince Rupert, focused on enabling investment
             attraction, trade diversification and economic growth.
        •    In 2024-25, Alberta’s government entered into research studies with the Prince Rupert
             Port Authority and Vancouver Fraser Port Authority to identify export potential and
             supply chain capabilities that can support Alberta producers and shippers in utilizing
             new terminal infrastructures located in Canada’s West Coast ports, such as the Ridley
             Island Energy Export Facility, CANXPORT, among other major projects.

Alberta’s government sponsored Canada’s Productivity Summit, hosted by the University of
Calgary, in October 2024. This event demonstrated the mounting consensus that low productivity
growth has reached a crisis point in Canada and action is needed in multiple areas including
regulatory reform, streamlined project approvals, reducing interprovincial trade barriers and
making our tax system more competitive.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                  19
Results Analysis



A key insight from the Summit is the key role that machinery and equipment investment as well as
technology adoption play in enhancing productivity.

        •    In October 2024, the department issued a $150,000 grant to the Edmonton Chamber of
             Commerce to support the development of a strategy and implementation plan for the
             application of artificial intelligence in the construction/engineering sector in Edmonton.
        •    In March 2025, the department approved a $5.03 million grant to the Canadian
             Manufacturers and Exporters for a pilot project to support technology adoption and
             productivity enhancements in Alberta’s manufacturing sector.

The department is taking concrete steps to support economic growth and job creation in the
defence sector.

        •    The department provided a $350,000 grant to Edmonton International Airport to
             conduct a comprehensive assessment of the potential for attracting defence and air
             force supply chain investments. This initiative aligns with Alberta's strategic goals of
             economic diversification and strengthening the aerospace, defence and manufacturing
             sectors.
        •    The department also initiated planning with the Alberta Aviation and Aerospace Council
             and other partners to host the Alberta Defence Roundtable at the May 2025 Alberta
             Aviation, Aerospace and Defence Summit.

Investment and Growth Fund

The Investment and Growth Fund (IGF) is a targeted investment incentive program to encourage
high-value private sector investments in Alberta that create new jobs and grow the economy. Since
program inception in 2021, $28.8 million in IGF grants have been awarded to 13 projects.
Cumulatively, these 13 grants are expected to support over 1,250 permanent full-time jobs and
more than 1,000 temporary jobs, with total capital spending of more than $821 million in Alberta.
Based on the grant funding to capital spending ratio of projects announced to date, for every $1
dollar in IGF grants awarded, $29 will be spent in the province.

Through the IGF, Alberta supported four major investments in 2024-25 with $4.2 million in grants,
including Logistik Unicorp’s hemp processing facility in Elk Point, NewCold’s food storage facility in
Coaldale, Lufthansa Technik Canada’s aircraft engine maintenance and repair facility in Calgary and
Crust Craft’s bakery expansion in Edmonton. These projects are projected to support a combined
261 permanent full-time jobs and 445 temporary jobs for Albertans.

The department conducted an in-depth review of the IGF and developed a comprehensive approach
to align the program with the government’s productivity goals and make the program more
self-sustaining. The renewed IGF will be launched in 2025-26.




20                                                        Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                           Results Analysis



Investment Concierge Services

The department provides dedicated concierge support for select, high-impact job-creating
investments with the goal of securing positive final investment decisions (FID), while maximizing
economic and labour benefits for the province. Concierge services are:

        •    delivered in partnership with investment attraction agencies, other orders of
             government and departments;
        •    focused on removing barriers to reaching positive FID for large, transformational
             investments with complex cross-ministry needs, significant industry implications
             and/or substantial government program, policy or intergovernmental implications; and
        •    focused on manufacturing, logistics and supply chains, defense and aerospace industries
             and other sectors with significant economic impacts.

In 2024-25, the department provided concierge services to the following job-creating investors
resulting in key positive investment decisions:

        •    In May 2024, Vopak and AltaGas announced a positive final investment decision on the
             Ridley Island Energy Export Facility at the Port of Prince Rupert. The capital cost of the
             project is valued at $1.35 billion and will improve market access for Canada’s energy
             sector by facilitating the export of liquefied petroleum gases, with initial export capacity
             of approximately 1.7 million tonnes per year once the facility is in operation by the end
             of 2026. The department's concierge services supported federal advocacy on funding
             needs and the creation of a trilateral partnership with the Government of British
             Columbia and the Prince Rupert Port Authority, which led to the project’s final
             investment decision.
        •    In February 2025, Lufthansa Technik (LHT) Canada announced a new $120 million
             aerospace maintenance facility at the Calgary airport, which will create up to 160
             permanent jobs and 170 construction jobs. Lufthansa Technik also announced that it
             was establishing its Canadian headquarters in Calgary. The investment was a key
             catalyst for WestJet to enter into a 15-year, multi-billion-dollar maintenance contract
             with LHT for extensive maintenance, repair and overhaul services for its engines. The
             department’s concierge services provided detailed analysis to support the evaluation of
             Alberta’s competitiveness against a competing jurisdiction. The concierge services also
             involved federal advocacy for financing support, program funding from the department
             and other partners and extensive project advisory support for Lufthansa Technik and
             the Calgary Airport Authority.

Accessible Data Tools for Businesses and Investors

Launched in April 2024, Alberta’s Site Selector Tool is a new, best-in-class online investment
service that consolidates information on property listings with infrastructure and socio-economic
data from the Alberta Regional Dashboard into a user-friendly interface. The benefits of this tool are
twofold: it gives businesses and investors access to the data they need to make informed decisions
about expanding or setting up a business in Alberta and it gives municipalities and economic
developers a platform to raise the profile of opportunities in their communities. This tool supports
the department’s strong focus on job creation, investment attraction and economic diversification
as well as our mandate to enhance pathfinding services and other business-attraction initiatives.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                       21
Results Analysis



To date, 145 municipalities have been involved in providing contact details to include on the tool's
site listing pages. Since its launch, various features have been added to the Alberta Site Selector
Tool, including the ability to share and add properties to a list of favourites, as well as the ability to
drop a pin on the map and generate a page with municipal data and location-specific data. Custom
and shareable views and new statistics and infrastructure layers such as labour force by occupation
and industry, power generation and fibre internet are also features of the tool, among others. The
Alberta Site Selector Tool can be found online at: https://regionaldashboard.alberta.ca/#/site-
selector.

The department also provides a suite of related, publicly accessible data applications, including the
Alberta Economic Dashboard, Alberta Regional Dashboard, Alberta Major Projects and Export
Alberta. The department’s data applications give Alberta a competitive advantage for attracting
investment. They help economic developers across the province promote their regions, investors
analyze investment opportunities and guide Alberta businesses through the export process,
including identifying export opportunities for their products.

1.2 Deliver client-centered programs and tools to support Alberta’s economic growth and
diversification, including the Alberta Film and Television Tax Credit and support small
businesses to be resilient and competitive.

Film and Television Tax Credit

The Film and Television Tax Credit (FTTC) program aims to grow Alberta’s film and television
sector by providing incentives for productions to film in Alberta. The program continues to support
a thriving Alberta film and television industry. To participate in the program, productions must first
apply to the program and be authorized to participate, applying for their tax credit certification
once filming is complete.

      Film and Television Tax Credit

                                                           2022-23        2023-24        2024-25
      Number of productions authorized                     62             43             39

      Total value of Alberta investment expected           $353           $293           $219
                                                           million        million        million
      Number of productions approved for tax               24             36             34
      credits

      Total value of tax credits approved during the       $26.7          $103.3         $55.3
      year                                                 million        million        million

      Total value of Alberta investment                    $112.4         $443.4         $235.5
      (expenditures) from productions with                 million        million        million
      approved tax credits

      *Tax credit requests may not be received in the same year that a production is
      authorized to participate in the program. The tax credit request occurs within 42
      months of authorization.




22                                                          Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis



In 2024-25, 44 FTTC applications were received and 39 applications were authorized to participate
in the program. The authorized productions are expected to spend $219.16 million in Alberta, have
a tax credit value of approximately $52.86 million and support more than 1,900 jobs in the
province. A total of 41 tax credit requests were received in 2024-25 and 34 tax credit letters were
issued with a total value of $55.3 million.

To enhance the competitiveness of the FTTC program, the department introduced changes to the
program in June 2024 to:

        •    widen the program’s application window, creating greater administrative flexibility and
             enabling productions to get their tax credits earlier;
        •    ensure the program has clear rules, appropriate oversight and less red tape; and
        •    attract new production genres and provide consideration for filming in diverse parts of
             Alberta, including rural areas.

Biz Connect

Biz Connect is a pathfinding service that provides support to Alberta’s small businesses and
entrepreneurs and helps them start, grow and succeed. It serves as a direct line of communication
between small businesses and entrepreneurs and the department, helping businesses navigate
services and programs available through over 300 small business organizations. It provides timely,
targeted and relevant referrals and business supports, including how to access advice, financing
and training. Referrals to partner organizations include small business service providers, business
associations, chambers of commerce, financial institutions, post-secondary institutions, non-profit
organizations offering loans and all levels of government.

In 2024-25, the Biz Connect team received 620 inquiries. Of these, 340 dealt with funding, grants
and access to capital, 205 were regarding questions around entrepreneurs, start-up and business
development, four were for Indigenous supports and grants for business and 71 were categorized
as general/other. Inquiry numbers have dropped significantly since the Small Business Resources
webpage was updated in summer 2024. The updated webpage makes it easier for stakeholders to
navigate to resources applicable to their situation and needs.

Business Link

Business Link is a non-profit organization that helps Alberta’s small businesses start and succeed.
They provide free one-on-one coaching and advice for entrepreneurs and small business owners
in-person and virtually. They help small business owners learn how to navigate the startup process,
access market research, attend events and webinars, find online resources and build a network.
They also provide support for Indigenous and immigrant/newcomer entrepreneurs. In 2024-25,
the department provided $1.5 million to Business Link through a grant to support their operations
and delivery of their services. In 2024-25, 5,304 clients were served, including 462 Indigenous
clients and 1,367 newcomer clients.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                   23
Results Analysis



Futurpreneur

Futurpreneur is a national, non-profit organization that provides seed financing, mentoring and
other support tools to young entrepreneurs aged 18 to 39. The organization’s loan program
provides up to $75,000 in collateral-free, low-interest loan financing (a combination of $25,000
from Futurpreneur and up to $50,000 from the Business Development Bank of Canada) specific to
young entrepreneurs. A single application process, adjudicated by Futurpreneur, facilitates access
to these funds.

In 2024-25, Futurpreneur supported the creation of 105 new businesses and assisted four business
acquisitions. Futurpreneur also held one in-person and one online succession planning workshop.
Businesses that Futurpreneur has helped through their loan and mentorship program include
WildRoots Bistro in St Albert, focusing on local ingredients; Garderie Les Petits Yogis, a child care
centre in Beaumont offering a program to improve emotional intelligence; and TriFit Training, a
personal training and group fitness gym in Airdrie.

In 2024-25, the department approved a new three-year grant to Futurpreneur totaling $900,000
($300,000 per year for three years), a 20 per cent funding increase over the prior three-year
agreement to support their operations and expand delivery of their services.

Red Tape Reduction

In support of the government-wide red tape reduction             Red Tape Reduction
initiative, the ministry, including its agencies, boards and
commissions, has reduced its regulatory requirements by          The ministry’s baseline count
44.7 per cent since the red tape reduction initiative began      (including agencies, boards and
in May 2019. This result exceeds the target of 33 per cent.      commissions) is 39,363
                                                                 regulatory requirements
Legislation and regulations account for 45.9 per cent of the     including 18,078 regulatory
ministry’s baseline requirements, while forms and policies       requirements under legislation
account for 54.1 per cent. Of the 39,363 baseline                and regulation and 21,285 in
requirements, 7,332 belong to the ministry’s                     forms and policies.
agencies, boards and commissions.

Having surpassed the 33 per cent reduction target in 2022-23, no significant regulatory reductions
or additions occurred in 2024-25. However, the ministry remains committed to regulatory
approaches and program delivery that reduce unnecessary government oversight and emphasize
outcomes to improve access to government services. Over the course of the year, the ministry made
a number of improvements to make things easier for Albertans and businesses, including
streamlining the Film and Television Tax Credit (page 22-23) and the Alberta Export Expansion
Program (page 27).




24                                                        Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis



1.3 Promote Alberta’s trade interests on the global stage and support Alberta businesses to
diversify into new international markets and advance and defend Alberta’s interests in
negotiation of international agreements to enhance trade and investment.

Promote Alberta’s Trade Interests

The department is committed to working with international and national partners to advance
shared interests, creating new opportunities for people and businesses in Alberta and globally. The
focus on promoting Alberta, by pursuing new markets and trading partners, has increased since the
change in administration in the United States in early 2025.

With actual spending of approximately $1.1 million (including travel and other expenses, such as
booth costs), the department led 28 international missions for companies across the province.
Alberta companies and trade-related organizations participated in over 450 engagements, with an
average of 16 companies per mission. They benefited from targeted business-to-business meetings,
information sessions and networking opportunities.

Minister Jones led six international trade missions in 2024-25:

        •    United Kingdom, June 2024: This mission included participation in Canada Day London
             celebrations and promoting trade and investment with the United Kingdom;
        •    Argentina, October 2024: This mission included participation at Argentina Oil and Gas
             Patagonia 2024, with a delegation of 10 Alberta organizations, as well as government
             and industry meetings;
        •    United Arab Emirates (UAE), November 2024: This mission included the Abu Dhabi
             International Petroleum Exhibition and Conference, with approximately 70 Alberta
             organizations, as well as government and industry meetings;
        •    Indonesia and the Philippines, December 2024: This Team Canada trade mission
             included attendance from 27 Alberta organizations in clean tech, energy security and
             agriculture technology;
        •    UAE, February 2025: This mission included attendance at Investopia 2025, which
             fosters global economic partnerships and investment; and
        •    Germany, March 2025: This mission was anchored around Hannover Messe 2025, the
             world’s largest industrial and advanced manufacturing event and included more than
             50 Alberta companies and trade-related organizations.

Additionally, the department led 22 non-ministerial trade missions supporting a variety of sectors
at events around the world, including BioJapan, Arab Health and Mobile World Congress. To further
advance Alberta’s trade priorities and interests in global markets, the department actively engages
with international governments (diplomatic officials such as Ambassadors, Consuls General and
High Commissioners) to strengthen business ties, discuss alignment of trade interests and foster
healthy and productive relationships with other jurisdictions. Proactive and strategic engagement
with jurisdictions facilitates trade relations and bilateral economic cooperation, promotes exports
and imports and attracts foreign investment. In 2024-25, the department participated in 23
diplomatic meetings informed and guided by key factors such as:

        •    engaging with countries that represent significant export destinations for Alberta;
        •    strategic interests between Alberta and the country or region, aligning with broader
             economic and trade priorities;
        •    building off of existing relationships and establishing new relationships;




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                   25
Results Analysis



        •    recent or upcoming missions that provide opportunities to build on established
             momentum; and
        •    maintaining and strengthening trade ties, with the goal of identifying mutually
             beneficial opportunities for trade expansion and collaboration.

In 2024-25, the department promoted Alberta as a premier trade and investment environment by
hosting international delegations at the annual Global Energy Show, held June 11-13, 2024 at
Calgary’s BMO Centre. The department engaged with delegations from Argentina, Brazil, Colombia,
Mexico, Turkey, Kazakhstan, Nigeria and Ghana, as well as led meetings, seminars and engagements
with these and other nations to expand trade relationships, promote Alberta companies and foster
economic cooperation.

To further promote Alberta’s trade interests, the department actively engages with key players in
the trade ecosystem. In 2024-25, the department initiated Trade Team Alberta, a collaborative
forum comprised of the largest federal, provincial and regional trade partners in Alberta. This
group coordinates trade activities through a Team Alberta approach, promoting the province's
trade interests and positioning Alberta as a valuable trade partner. Trade Team Alberta shares
trade information and intelligence, coordinates priority trade missions and events and explores
opportunities for collaboration. The forum aims to deliver coordinated, customized services,
programs and tools to help Alberta companies grow through increased exports, diversification and
expansion into new markets.

Alberta’s Trade Policy Interests

The department coordinates the government’s engagement in international trade negotiations, the
implementation of finalized international trade agreements and the ongoing management of
Alberta’s interests under these agreements. Alberta currently benefits from Canada’s 15 in-force
international trade agreements, covering 51 countries. This includes agreements with significant
trade partners in North America, the Indo-Pacific and Europe, including the Canada-U.S.-Mexico
Agreement, the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership and the
Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement. Alberta pursued its
interests in collaborative domestic discussions and sought strong Federal-Provincial-Territorial
engagement on United States relations following the U.S. Presidential election in November.

Trade Negotiations

In 2024-25, the department promoted Alberta’s economic and jurisdictional interests in active
negotiations with Indonesia, Ecuador and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. In December
2024, Canada and the Philippines announced the launch of exploratory discussions towards a Free
Trade Agreement negotiation. Efforts by the department included analysis of provincial economic
and jurisdictional interests, stakeholder engagement, intergovernmental dialogue and virtual and
in-person involvement in trade rounds.

Trade Strategic Grants

The department provided an additional $2.3 million to enter into an agreement with Calgary
Economic Development. This brought the total funding to $2.8 million to administer the Trade
Accelerator Program for 2025-30 and establish a new levelling up market diversification program
for Alberta companies to build export capacity and expand to new markets. These programs serve a
vital role in enhancing the export readiness of small and medium-sized enterprises, which is a
critical driver of Alberta’s economic growth and diversification.


26                                                       Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



Alberta Export Expansion Program

The Alberta Export Expansion Program provides funding to export-ready small and
medium-sized enterprises, including non-profit organizations, to travel to global markets to
promote their products, make business connections and explore partnership opportunities.

Alberta businesses, municipalities, Indigenous communities and industry associations were
supported through the Alberta Export Expansion Program, where 344 applications for grants, from
195 organizations, were supported in 2024-25. This program granted more than $985,000 in
2024-25 to help these organizations access international markets and attract global buyers.

In spring 2024, Alberta’s government made improvements to the Alberta Export Expansion
Program to better serve Alberta businesses. Changes reduced red tape, streamlined administration,
simplified funding amounts and clarified criteria for the program. Overall, these changes mean
companies spend less time completing their application and, if approved, receive funding faster, so
they can better use their time to build their businesses, create jobs and export to new markets.

1.4 Collaborate with community leaders, industry and business to diversify and grow their
regional economies.

Alberta’s government supports regional economies in a variety of ways including funding
local and regional economic development organizations offering a suite of programs, tools and
resources to create job growth and diversify Alberta’s economy.

Regional Economic Development Services

Alberta’s Regional Economic Development Specialists (REDS) provide economic development
practitioners and business service providers with targeted advice and support. These specialists
have local knowledge of the economic opportunities and challenges facing Alberta’s regions.
Through one-on-one consultation, regional and community meetings, webinars and collaborative
roundtable discussions, REDS offer the following core services:

        •    advisory services and outcome-based planning;
        •    economic information and best practices;
        •    pathfinding support; and
        •    tools and resources.

The REDS operate out of 10 offices across the province and provide economic development services
to all regions in Alberta.

In March 2025, the department provided a $426,700 non-program grant to the Edmonton Chamber
of Commerce for the development and delivery of a State of the Region report and the
implementation of recommendations for Edmonton World Trade Centre activities.

Additionally, in March 2025, the department provided a $560,000 non-program grant to Edmonton
Global for the development of sector-specific investment attraction videos and a digital asset library
with enhanced investor tools.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                    27
Results Analysis



Growth and Development of Alberta’s Airports

An affordable, efficient and well-connected air transportation network has a critical role to play in
Alberta’s economic competitiveness. It enables growth in key economic sectors that rely on the
effective movement of people and goods across Canada and to key international markets. Alberta
has unique competitive advantages that make it an ideal location for our aviation and aerospace
industries to grow.

Beginning in 2023-24, the department, in partnership with the ministries of Transportation and
Economic Corridors and Tourism and Sport, provided Regional Airport Development grants
totaling $1.1 million to support 10 airport improvement business case and feasibility study
projects. The funded projects were completed in 2024-25 and will support the growth of Alberta’s
regional airports by enabling them to identify, explore and prioritize improvements and
opportunities that will foster connectivity and increase their economic competitiveness.

In 2024-25, Alberta’s government provided a one-time, $500,000 non-program grant to the
Edmonton International Airport to advance the province’s commitment to attracting defence
investment opportunities in the province. Work included identifying key defence investment
opportunities and assessing their economic impact on the Edmonton regional economy.
Additionally, strategic recommendations were developed to enhance the Edmonton region’s
competitiveness in attracting defence investments. Further, the Edmonton International Airport
will undertake an aviation skills training study, which will identify opportunities to develop
aviation skills training capacity in the province. This will include assessing market potential for
commercial pilot and flight crew training and engagement with post-secondary institutions on
developing accredited and industry experience integrated training programs.

Northern and Regional Economic Development Grants

The Northern and Regional Economic Development Grant (NRED) program helps attract private
investment and supports economic growth and diversification across Alberta by providing up to
$300,000 in funding to projects that enhance business supports, improve investment readiness and
build capacity for regional economic development. Over 225 projects have been supported since
program inception in 2022.

To ensure Alberta’s regional economies can continue to prosper, the NRED program provided $9.8
million to 81 unique projects in 2024-25. This included $2.7 million to 27 municipal projects, $4.8
million to 41 projects led by not-for-profits, $1.4 million to eight First Nations projects and $0.9
million to five Métis projects. Twenty-nine of these projects, with total grant funding of $3.8 million,
are in northern communities. The third application intake for the grant concluded on
December 6, 2024, with 143 eligible applicants seeking $16,878,894 in funding.

Through NRED grants, Alberta’s government allows communities to apply for programming that
suits their unique needs. Some of the 2024-25 projects funded through the NRED program include:

     •   Town of Taber: $17,500 for its “Think Taber” project to attract global investment to the
         community;
     •   Slave Lake Regional Tourism Society: $38,400 for a regional promotional project;
     •   NeurAlberta Tech’s project: $250,000 to unite students, graduates, Subject Matter Experts
         and partners to drive innovation in neurotechnology and Artificial Intelligence;
     •   Chiniki First Nation: $281,300 for infrastructure planning for an Indigenous affordable
         housing plan; and




28                                                        Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Results Analysis



    •   Lethbridge Economic Development Initiative Society was awarded two grants: one for
        $50,000 and one for $97,600, for building creative industries and for business retention
        programming.

Northern Alberta Development Council

The Northern Alberta Development Council (NADC) identifies, promotes and advises on practical
measures to advance economic and social development in northern Alberta. It provides a northern
lens on existing and proposed government services and programs, while facilitating opportunities
for stakeholders to connect and collaborate on northern issues of common interest.

The NADC Chair, MLA for Fort McMurray-Wood Buffalo Tany Yao, has submitted NADC’s report
with recommendations on advancing northern development to Minister Jones on March 31, 2025.
The report is under review and government will respond to the recommendations in 2025-26.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                  29
Results Analysis



Northern Alberta Development Bursary Program

The Northern Alberta Development Bursary (NADB) program encourages students to train for jobs
that are in demand in northern Alberta and includes a return service component as a condition of
support. The bursary program is administered by the department in partnership with Education
and Advanced Education. Applicants can apply to the NADB bursary; the First Nations, Métis and
Inuit bursary; one of the Speciality bursaries (Medical and Dental, Nurse Practitioner, Pharmacy,
Veterinary Student); the Northern Student Teacher Bursary, or the Bursary Partnership Program.

The NADB program awarded $2,383,000 in bursaries supporting 315 students in 2024-25. The
NADB and Specialty streams were the most accessed programs supporting 119 recipients who will
pursue careers in high demand fields across northern Alberta. The First Nations, Métis and Inuit
stream, supporting 94 recipients. There was an increase from 56 to 65 bursary recipients indicating
more businesses and organizations are taking advantage of the Bursary Partnership Program to
support students in the north. In 2024-25, the overall program return of service rate was 75.62 per
cent. The program has been consistently successful in attracting and retaining a skilled workforce
in northern Alberta’s high-demand industries with success rates above 75 per cent (including 76.26
per cent in 2022-23 and 75.44 per cent in 2023-24).

In 2024-25, $954,500 supported 94 First Nations, Métis and Inuit students through the First
Nations, Métis and Inuit (FNMI) stream of the Northern Alberta Development Bursary program. The
FNMI stream accounted for 30 per cent of the Northern Alberta Development Bursaries awarded in
2024-25. Applications to the FNMI stream grew by 48 per cent in 2024-25 from the previous year.


 Northern Alberta Development Bursary Program

                                                     2022-23           2023-24           2024-25
 Total recipients                                     235              321             315
 Total funds distributed                              $1,502,450       $2,537,750      $2,383,000
 NADB stream recipients                               75               120             103
 NADB-Specialty stream* recipients                    6                14              16
 First Nations, Métis and Inuit stream recipients     67               97              94
 Northern Student Teacher Bursary recipients**        25               37              37
 Bursary Partnership Program recipients               62               53              65
 Health Care Practicum recipients***                  52               49              38
 * The sub-sets of the Specialty bursaries include Medical and Dental (3 in 2024-25), Nurse
 practitioner (4 in 2024-25), Pharmacy (6 in 2024-25) and Veterinary (3 in 2024-25) recipients.

 **Alberta Education provides Jobs, Economy and Trade reporting data for the Northern Student
 Teacher Bursary Program.

 ***The Health Care Practicum Program is administered by the department. Funding is provided
 by Alberta Health Services and recipients are not counted in the NADB bursary totals.




30                                                      Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



Jobs, Economy and Trade: Performance Measure 1.a:
      Net investment in Alberta film and television productions for every $1 of Alberta Film
      and Television Tax Credits ($ dollars)


                          Prior Years’ Results
                                                                        2024-25          2024-25
  2020-21           2021-22            2022-23       2023-24             Target           Actual


  N/A               4.0                4.2           4.3              4.0             4.3


This measure reflects the associated Alberta expenditure for every $1 in tax credit issued to eligible
productions. This demonstrates the efficacy of Alberta’s Film and Television Tax Credit program to
attract investments for every dollar in tax credit spent, indicating economic contributions to this
sector in Alberta, in alignment with government’s commitment to grow cultural industries
(including areas such as book publishing, magazine publishing, sound recording and film
production).

        Film and Television Tax Credit

                                                         2023-24            2024-25
        Total value of Alberta investment expected       $443.4 million     $235.5 million
        from productions with approved tax credits
        Total value of tax credits approved during the $103.3 million       $55.3 million
        year
        Net investment for every $1 of Alberta Film      $4.30              $4.26
        and Television Tax Credits ($ dollars)
        *Tax credit requests may not be received in the same year that a production is
        authorized to participate in the program. The tax credit request occurs within 42
        months of authorization.

The 2024–25 fiscal year was a strong year for the program from a net investment ratio standpoint.
Several major studio-backed productions completed filming and received tax credits in the
province, showcasing Alberta’s ability to attract medium to large-scale projects. Of the 34
productions supported during the year, 13 (38 per cent) qualified for a 22 per cent tax credit. The
higher than anticipated net investment ratio of 4.3 was driven by the substantial Alberta
expenditures of these 13 productions, which totaled $189.9 million. The remaining 21 productions
received a 30 per cent tax credit (Alberta owned productions) and accounted for $45.7 million in
Alberta spending.

As the measure reflects a backward-looking ratio, a future decline in the net investment ratio is
anticipated. This expectation is based on a broader slowdown in the film and television industry,
driven by budget constraints among major U.S. studios.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                    31
Results Analysis



Jobs, Economy and Trade: Performance Indicator 1.b:
      Year-over-year change in Alberta’s economic activity (per cent)


                      Prior Years’ Results
  2019-20                                                                2023-24
                   2020-21        2021-22          2022-23

  -5.26            7.22           5.64             1.43                2.14

The indicator demonstrates the department’s success in enabling a nationally and internationally
competitive investment environment. The indicator also gives context to the department’s
performance in contributing to economic growth, while providing a broad picture of the state of
Alberta’s economy. The Alberta Activity Index (AAX) combines nine economic indicators into a
single index to give a summary of Alberta’s economic activity.

Alberta’s economic activity has recovered its pandemic losses and grown to surpass pre-pandemic
levels. AAX has been on an upward trend since the lowest point Alberta experienced in April 2020.
Although its growth slowed in 2022-23, economic activity showed signs of improvement in
2023-24.

Economic activity was driven by growth in employment, housing starts, new drilling activity, new
truck sales and oil production. Average weekly earnings showed muted year-over-year growth.
Conversely, declines in manufacturing shipments, wholesale trade, and retail sales in some months
may have subdued growth in the AAX during this period.

The Government of Alberta’s Budget 2025 Economic Outlook notes that changes in U.S. trade policy
and the introduction of retaliatory tariffs are expected to dampen economic activity in 2024-25.
This slowdown may be reflected in indicators such as manufacturing shipments, wholesale and
retail trade sales, and new truck sales.


 Alberta Activity Index Annualized Results*

 October 2020       October 2021         October 2022        October 2023          October 2024
 259.8              278.6                294.0               298.5                 304.9
 *The base period for Alberta Activity Index values is January 1981 (i.e., January 1981=100).




32                                                        Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Results Analysis



Jobs, Economy and Trade: Performance Indicator 1.c:
Value of Alberta’s non-residential capital investment ($ million)

                         Prior Years’ Results
                                                                        2024
  2020              2021               2022         2023

  48,641            55,797             70,108       72,127          72,921

Capital investment is a sign of a growing, healthy economy. As companies expand, they purchase
property, build facilities and buy equipment. This contributes to Alberta’s Gross Domestic Product
and improves Alberta’s long-term economic performance.

Alberta non-residential investment was $72,921 million in 2024, an increase of 1.1 per cent from
2023. Mining, quarrying and oil and gas extraction accounted for 42.6 per cent ($31.0 billion) of
total capital investment in Alberta, followed by transportation and warehousing (9.9 per cent or
$7.2 billion) and utilities (9.4 per cent or $6.9 billion).

Investment in mining, quarrying, oil and gas extraction increased by 3.4 per cent from 2023,
buoyed by higher sustaining capital from rising bitumen production along with strong drilling
activity. Significant increases were seen in manufacturing (up 41.9 per cent to $4.8 billion),
supported by major projects such as Air Products’ Hydrogen Facility, Imperial’s Renewable Diesel
Refinery, McCain’s Potato Processing Plant and CGC’s Wallboard Manufacturing Plant. Increases
were also seen in public administration (up 23.3 per cent to $5.9 billion), educational services (up
20.0 per cent to $1.6 billion), accommodation and food services (up 15.0 per cent to $436.9 million)
and construction (up 10.5 per cent to $2.8 billion).

Gains in manufacturing were primarily due to increases in food manufacturing (up 105.2 per cent
to $741.5 million), chemical manufacturing (up 71.2 per cent to $2.0 billion) and petroleum and
coal product manufacturing (up 20.2 per cent to $1.1 billion).




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                   33
Results Analysis



Outcome Two: Alberta has a skilled and resilient labour force.
Ensuring workers have skills and knowledge helps them succeed in the workforce and also helps
businesses and the economy grow and thrive.

Key Objectives

2.1   Implement initiatives to address Alberta’s current and longer-term labour market
      challenges.

Alberta is Calling

The Alberta is Calling Moving Bonus is a one-time, $5,000 refundable tax credit to attract
out-of-province workers to Alberta by offsetting the costs associated with relocation. The Moving
Bonus is intended to fill skilled trade shortages in critical sectors like construction and oil and gas,
with applications considered on a first-come, first-served basis.
A budget of $10 million is available to support up to 2,000 skilled tradespeople who moved to
Alberta between May 1 and December 31, 2024 and meet all other eligibility criteria. An online
application portal has been developed that supports seamless interactions with the Government of
Alberta. The portal opened for application intake in May 2025.
Ministry-Specific Job Attraction Strategy

The Ministry-Specific Job Attraction Strategy, developed in collaboration with economic ministries
across government, targets skilled workers to address labour market shortages in critical sectors.
The strategy aims to raise awareness for young Albertans (aged 16 to 24) and adults changing
careers about the skilled trades and professions available in each economic sector including
pathways for education, apprenticeship and training. Engagement with internal and external
stakeholders is currently underway and the strategy is anticipated to be completed in fall 2025.

As part of this effort to strengthen the labour market and address labour gaps, the department
partnered with the Alberta Chambers of Commerce and Alberta Post-Secondary Network to
support Phase 2 of the Talent Development Taskforce. Through a $2.4 million grant over the next
three years, the Alberta Chambers of Commerce will take the next step in addressing skill shortages
and support job attraction by introducing a Talent Pipeline Management (TPM) system in Alberta.
Built by business, for business, the TPM system provides employers and their education and
workforce partners with strategies and tools to co-design talent supply chains. Phase 2 of the Talent
Development Taskforce’s project is intended to train and certify 35 TPM practitioners across
Alberta, deliver two workforce acceleration summits to initiate TPM strategies in Alberta’s
high-demand sectors and continue to enhance Alberta’s labour market information system with
near real-time employer and post-secondary student feedback mechanisms.




34                                                         Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis



Labour Market Information

The department is responsible for collecting, disseminating and analyzing information about
Alberta’s labour market. To achieve this, the department releases publicly available labour market
reports to support informed decision-making by various users, including businesses, investors and
post-secondary institutions. These reports can be found online at: https://www.alberta.ca/labour-
market-information. This information is also used by students who are trying to determine a career
path, career researchers, training providers who are developing new programs for job seekers and
employers making decisions about workforce planning, hiring and compensation. The department
provides monthly reports on current labour market conditions, quarterly reports on job vacancies
and forecasts of Alberta’s occupational demand and supply. In July 2024, the department released
the 2023-33 Alberta Occupational Outlook, which provides a forecast of labour shortages and
surpluses for occupations in Alberta over the next 10 years.

To address gaps in available business and employment information, the department partnered with
the City of Edmonton in March 2024 to conduct a multi-year Edmonton Business Census pilot
project. Open data and findings of the 2024 Business Census are available on the City of Edmonton
website:
https://gis.edmonton.ca/portal/apps/storymaps/stories/9123139c578d424e9d8d94e858f472fb.

The department is also working to improve labour market information to better respond to
emerging issues and challenges specific to the province. In September 2024, the Government of
Alberta supported the official launch of the Alberta Centre for Labour Market Research at the
University of Alberta after committing a total of $1.2 million to the project over three years. The
centre is comprised of 26 researchers from post-secondary institutions across the province with a
mandate to provide Albertans with balanced, independent and credible research and analysis on
labour market issues affecting the province.

Other initiatives include a labour market information subscription service launched in May 2024
for users to receive labour market information publications by email. Since its launch, over 3,000
subscriptions to 20 labour market information products have been received.

2.2   Deliver responsive training and employment programs that enable workers and
      businesses to succeed in a dynamic economy.

Training for Work

Training for Work programs provide training opportunities to help unemployed and
underemployed Albertans develop the skills necessary to find work, improve their employment
situation and increase their ability to adapt to a changing labour market. The department delivers
training for work programs throughout the province, including priority sectors such as
construction, transportation, agriculture, energy and business and accounting, with input from local
employers on training and hiring needs. Training for Work programs are divided into five streams,
including: Workplace Training, Immigrant Bridging, Self‑Employment, Transition to Employment
Services and Integrated Training.

Training for Work programs invested $25.3 million in over 65 urban and rural communities across
Alberta in 2024-25. Twenty-eight new contracts with business and industry partners began,
including employment services for unemployed Albertans aged 45+ in Lethbridge and Medicine
Hat, in addition to a new Early Childcare Educator program in Edmonton.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                     35
Results Analysis



In 2024-25, 4,089 participants began training and employment programs. In total, 87 contracts
actively delivered training and employment programs in 2024-25, compared to 88 contracts in the
2023-24 fiscal year. In 2024-25, 70.7 per cent of participants were employed or in further training
or education 90 days after training.

Program success is impacted by targeted engagement with individuals, business and industry,
training providers, communities and other levels of government. Training for Work programs
measure employment outcomes through established program performance evaluation criteria to
satisfy provincial and federal requirements as part of Labour Market Transfer Agreements.

Canada-Alberta Job Grant

The Canada-Alberta Job Grant is a federal-provincial partnership that allows employers and
government to share the cost of training employees. Grants are available to eligible employers to
offset the costs of training new and existing employees to meet the needs of job creators and the
broader Alberta economy. Employers across the province and in all sectors are eligible for the
Canada-Alberta Job Grant.

                   Canada-Alberta Job Grant

                                                    2022-23       2023-24        2024-25*
                   Albertans approved for           11,259        12,172         6,508
                   training*
                   Employer applications            9,352         8,783          4,108
                   approved
                   Unique employers approved        3,298         3,747          1,922

                   Funds committed                  $29.8M        $26.8M         $14.4M

                   Data is extracted from administrative databases and is current as of
                   time of publishing.
                   *An individual Albertan may have participated in more than one
                   training course.
                   **The program closed for applications in August 2024 due to a
                   reduction in federal funding.

In 2024-25, $14.4 million was used to support 1,922 employers to train 6,508 new and existing
employees. Of these, 93 per cent of employers were small or medium-sized businesses. The sectors
that made the most use of the program were oil and gas, construction, professional, scientific and
technical services and manufacturing.

The Canada-Alberta Job Grant closed for applications on August 7, 2024, due to reduced funding
under the Canada-Alberta Labour Market Transfer Agreement. Applications submitted prior to the
closure will continue to be processed. The program is under review, with a modified program
expected to be launched in 2025-26.




36                                                           Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



Workforce Partnership Program

The Workforce Partnership Program provides grant funding to employers, industry and sector
associations, regional organizations and Indigenous organizations to support workforce
development and labour market adjustment strategies. Effective partnerships improve the capacity
of organizations to deal with workforce demands and support economic growth on regional and
provincial levels. A program priority is to build industry and employer capacity to attract and retain
newcomers, youth, Indigenous peoples, women, mature workers and people living with disabilities.

In 2024-25, a total of $2.9 million supported 42 workforce partnership grants, including 10 sector
and 32 community-based grants. Projects include:

    •   Alberta Hotel and Lodging Association’s Building a Thriving Workforce project will address
        labour shortages in the hotel industry by connecting hotels with skilled workers, exploring
        recruitment strategies for youth and providing tools and resources to improve human
        resource practices of employers.
    •   Alberta Food Processors’ Association Toolkits to Support Newcomer and Youth Integration
        project will create employer toolkits for youth and newcomers to address ongoing labour
        shortages in the sector.
    •   BILD Alberta’s Skilled Youth Campaign will launch a targeted digital awareness and
        education campaign to engage youth with career opportunities in residential construction.
    •   The Municipality of Jasper’s Business Recovery project will help Jasper businesses rebuild
        and adapt following the 2024 wildfire. Business owners and managers will benefit from
        advice and practical strategies for business recovery, staff attraction and retention.
    •   The City of Fort Saskatchewan’s Inclusion in the Heartland project will bring together
        employers and representatives from underrepresented groups with a goal of enhancing
        recruitment and retention efforts from a wider pool of qualified candidates.
    •   The Lloydminster Construction Association’s Try-a-Trade project will allow employers to
        showcase skilled trades opportunities through hands-on learning in a variety of trades.
    •   Cypress County’s Ag Connections Conference will bring together producers, educational
        institutions and industry organizations to address succession planning, competition for
        talent and available sources of skills and labour.

A complete list of all grants is posted online at: https://www.alberta.ca/workforce-partnerships-
grants.aspx.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                    37
Results Analysis



Alberta Industry Skills Grant

The Alberta Industry Skills grant (AISG) is a new initiative that helps employers train their workers
to fill in-demand jobs, particularly in industries with high employment demand. Through AISG,
workers gain industry-certified, transferable skills that meet the needs of employers in Alberta’s
growing economy. In 2024-25, a total of $5.16 million was invested in the following four projects:

     •   Alberta Aviation Council’s Aviation Futures project will train for several in-demand roles in
         the aviation and aerospace sector through a combination of hands-on internships and
         classroom instruction.
     •   CWB Group’s Expanding Non-Destructive Testing Certification project will provide training
         and certification in ultrasonic phased-array non-destructive testing, a leading-edge
         technology with applications across the construction, oil and gas and aerospace sectors.
     •   Technology Alberta’s TechFIT Management Skills Training project will deliver essential
         non-technical skills training in competencies such as management, finance, innovation
         development and marketing. Equipping the workforce with these skills will help small and
         emerging tech firms overcome growth challenges.
     •   Thermal Insulation Association of Canada’s Building Mechanical Insulation’s Sustainable
         Future project will train Albertans in the foundational skills needed for long-term careers as
         heat and frost insulators to address an urgent need for skilled tradespeople in mechanical
         insulation occupations.

Skills Grants and Programs

The Aviation Skills Grant (ASG) provides for-profit and not-for-profit employers operating in the
province’s aviation and aerospace sector up to $30,000 per trainee to help offset training costs for
new or vacant positions. Over two years, ending in 2024-25, ASG invested $11.2 million for 33
aviation and aerospace employers throughout the province to train 3,147 individuals for
high-demand occupations, such as pilots, aircraft maintenance engineers, technicians and quality
assurance personnel. Employers represented large and small operators from nine communities
throughout the province. The workers and organizations funded through the ASG play an important
role in supporting the growth and diversification of the province’s aviation and aerospace industry.

Since the commencement of the Skills Development Stream of the Workforce Strategies Grant
program (funded through Alberta at Work) in 2023, approximately 1,700 participants have been
accepted into skills and employment training. Skill-stream grants will conclude in May 2025.

The Culinary Skills Training Program for Newcomers delivered by the Edmonton Newcomer Centre
is an example of the positive effects that grant funding produces. This program continued to excel
by enabling newcomers to familiarize themselves with the norms and expectations of Canadian
food service workplaces while developing and applying their skills during a mentored work
exposure in the industry. Supported by $1.3 million in grant funding, the program has
demonstrated strong and impactful outcomes. Of the 86 participants that have completed training,
70 have secured employment in the food service industry resulting in an 82 per cent job placement
rate and exceeding the target of 70 per cent job placement for similar programs.




38                                                        Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



Indigenous Employment Training Partnerships

The Indigenous Employment Training Partnerships program funds Indigenous-led training and
work experience projects, tailored to help unemployed or underemployed First Nations, Inuit and
Métis peoples secure and maintain long-term employment. Locally created training projects target
the needs of both participants and employers by addressing employee readiness and ensuring
participants receive relevant skills training and certification. Projects may include additional
support, such as the inclusion of community Elders in programming for cultural identity
teachings. Projects offer a broad spectrum of training, which include Heavy Equipment Operator,
Culinary Arts, Pipeline Workers, Health Care Aides, Introduction to Trades, Administration and
Customer Service, Building Maintenance Worker and Service Rig Training.

Projects are developed in partnership with government, industry, employers and Indigenous
partners to fill identified labour force needs. Current partners include various Metis Settlements,
First Nations, Tribal Councils, urban Indigenous organizations and other Government of Alberta
ministries. These include:

    •   A training project with Horse Lake First Nation’s Service Rig Training, which provided five
        weeks of service rig training to 11 members in various positions. Phase 1 included an
        introduction to the industry for both the participants and family supports, in addition to
        classroom training including safety tickets. Phase 2 included the set up of an operational
        service on site, where hands-on training took place. Additional cultural training was
        provided including job safety, handling conflict, team building, cultural sensitivity and
        day-to-day struggles they may encounter. Seven partners including Horse Lake First Nation,
        industry and employers, EKWA Training Ltd. and the department supported a 100 per cent
        completion of training and the successful employment of all 11 members.

In 2024-25, 39 new Indigenous Employment and Training Partnerships projects started with a
combined total of 1,029 participants. The Government of Alberta provided approximately 65 per
cent of the combined total funding for projects, with 187 project partners providing the remaining
35 per cent of funding.

As projects may span multiple fiscal years, not all outcomes’ data can be captured within the fiscal
year period. Current outcomes data, as of March 31, 2025, is available for approximately 859
participants. Approximately 94 per cent of these participants have successfully completed training
as of March 31 and 52 per cent have gained employment.

In fiscal year 2024-25, $523,232 was spent to fund 15 new Indigenous Workforce Partnerships,
including both Labour Market Partnerships and Workforce Attraction and Retentions Partnerships.
For these Indigenous focused projects, the Government of Alberta provided approximately 52 per
cent of the combined total funding through the Labour Market Transfer Agreement while project
partners provided the remaining 48 per cent of the funding. Partnerships include:

    •   Lloydminster Chamber of Commerce hosted a partnership conference and job fair event to
        bring both Indigenous leaders and non-Indigenous decision-makers together to work on
        building economic and business partnerships. The job fair segment highlighted career paths
        to many sectors and employment opportunities with 400 participants (70 businesses) in
        attendance. This event, supported by local and regional First Nations and Metis Settlements
        as an introduction, resulted in individual and partnership outcomes.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                     39
Results Analysis



     •   Blood Tribe Employment and Skills Training, in partnership with Green Planet Energy
         Analytics, provides community engagement events, as well as capacity building educational
         and training events, for workforce development. These events offer knowledge related to
         the green energy industry, practical hands-on learning opportunities and identiy various
         pathways to employment. These sessions supported youth and the community in building
         deeper relationships and bridging the gap between industry and the Nation.

Coal Workforce Transition Program

The Coal Workforce Transition Program provides financial supports to workers in the coal industry
impacted by the government decision to phase out coal-fired electricity. The program has multiple
streams of support for workers, including:

     •   The Bridge to Re-employment relief grant, which provides financial assistance to workers
         searching for new jobs;
     •   The Bridge to Retirement relief grant, which provides financial assistance to coal workers
         who are close to retirement when laid off; and
     •   Relocation Assistance, which provides financial support for those who have moved at least
         40 kilometers to start a new job.

In 2024-25, the program provided a total of $2.6 million in financial support for employees affected
by the phase-out of coal-fired electricity generation, compared to $1.6 million in 2023-24. The
amount distributed each year varies depending on upcoming plans for closures and conversions
and associated workforce impacts. In the past year, 24 Albertans received a Bridge to
Re-employment grant, while 17 Bridge to Retirement grants were issued. No relocation grants were
issued in 2024-25.




40                                                       Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                         Results Analysis



Jobs, Economy and Trade: Performance Measure 2.a:
      Outcomes for Training for Work program clients


                         Prior Years’ Results
                                                                         2024-25          2024-25
  2020-21           2021-22            2022-23       2023-24              Target           Actual


  67.2%             75.5%              75.8%         74.3%             70%              70.7%

The percentage of Training for Work clients who report they are either employed, self-employed or
in further education or training after leaving a Training for Work program partially assesses the
effectiveness of these programs in helping participants meet these goals. Success is also affected by
the engagement of individuals, business and industry, training providers, communities and other
levels of government. Employment and/or training programs encourage attachment to the labour
market.

In 2024–25, 70.7 per cent of participants reported being employed, self-employed, or engaged in
further education or training after completing a Training for Work program. This is a 3.6
percentage point drop from the previous year’s result of 74.3 per cent. However, the outcome still
falls within the target level, meaning the program’s performance remains on track despite the
decline.

It is difficult to point to a single reason for the decrease in this year’s performance results compared
to the previous year. However, one likely factor is the rise in Alberta’s unemployment rate in 2024,
which indicated a more challenging job market. As a result, some program participants may have
had a harder time finding or keeping employment after completing training.

In addition, an increase in training programs offered by other ministries and the federal
government may create a short-term disruption as service providers adjust to a more competitive
and evolving environment. The contractors may need time to adjust their services to stay aligned
with the changing labour market and participant needs. To respond to this, the Training for Work
program has already adjusted it’s planned Requests for Proposals. These adjustments are based not
only on past program outcomes, but also on employer-based Labour Market Information, which
helps ensure that training remains relevant to what employers are looking for in the job market.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                     41
Results Analysis



Outcome Three: Albertans are safe at work and treated fairly in the workplace
Ensuring Albertans are treated fairly in the workplace and can return home safely from work helps
workers and their families prosper. Dispute resolution helps ensure workers and employers can
resolve issues in a timely fashion, ensures the effective application of Alberta’s labour laws, and
promotes fairness in Alberta’s workers’ compensation system.

Key Objectives

3.1 Work with stakeholders, employers and workers to implement changes to the
Occupational Health and Safety Code to protect the health and safety of Alberta workers.

Occupational Health and Safety Code Review

In 2024-25, the department’s three-year review plan to keep the Occupational Health and Safety
(OHS) Code current continued. An updated and easier-to-understand OHS Code helps employers
keep workers healthy and safe and supports Alberta’s economy. Regularly updating the OHS Code
allows it to keep pace with changing work practices, evolving technologies, emerging issues and
interprovincial trade agreements that support harmonization and labour mobility. It also provides
an opportunity to clarify work site party responsibilities and improve health and safety outcomes
while enabling innovation, competitiveness and streamlining requirements.

On December 4, 2024, updates to Parts 27 (Violence and Harassment), 33 (Explosives) and 37 (Oil
and Gas Wells), as well as miscellaneous changes to correct errors and align standards, came into
effect. Until March 31, 2025, work site parties could comply with either the new provisions in the
2024 OHS Code or the previous provisions in the 2023 OHS Code. Starting March 31, 2025, work
site parties must comply with the updated rules. The 2024 changes to the OHS Code were informed
by an online public survey undertaken between February and April 2024. More than 780 responses
were received; in general, 88 per cent of respondents supported the proposed changes.

3.2   Support a coordinated provincial occupational health and safety approach through
      education, prevention, inspections and investigations.

Occupational Health and Safety

Occupational health and safety legislation sets out the minimum health and safety standards for
Alberta’s workplaces. Effective health and safety management systems support workers’ health and
safety and help to reduce employer costs related to worker injury and illness. The department
works with employers, workers, health and safety associations, industry associations and labour
groups to promote a workforce that is informed and knowledgeable on workplace rights and
responsibilities. Education and enforcement activities are complementary and both tools help work
site parties achieve compliance with the legislation.

Occupational Health and Safety Compliance Activities

In 2024-25, the department conducted 10,947 inspections and 6,545 re-inspections, compared to
9,801 inspections and 5,975 re-inspections in 2023-24, an increase of 1,146 and 570 respectively.
These increases reflect meeting both a rise in demand for service as well as efforts by Occupational
Health and Safety (OHS) to streamline various business processes to enable more proactive
inspections to occur.




42                                                       Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



The proactive inspections program provides support to high-risk sectors or employers, focusing on
selected industries and emerging trends. The department chooses employers and sectors with
relatively high injury and illness rates, high frequency of incidents or complaints, or persistently
low rates of compliance to look for emerging trends. The proactive inspections program enhances
employers’ awareness of their responsibilities under the Occupational Health and Safety Act,
Regulation and Code. The program aims to protect workers’ health and safety by identifying and
controlling hazards; enhancing awareness among employers and workers with respect to their
relevant rights and responsibilities; and providing knowledge to vulnerable workers regarding
their rights pertaining to OHS legislation.

Reactive inspections are conducted to respond to complaints made by workers or members of the
public, referrals from other agencies or dangerous work refusals.

In 2024-25, 26 per cent of OHS inspections were proactive and 74 per cent were reactive. A shift
towards a greater number of proactive inspections is part of OHS’s broader strategy to target
compliance and enforcement efforts and resources to where they are most needed and have the
greatest opportunity for meaningful impact.


       Occupational Health and Safety

                                                           2022-23     2023-24       2024-25
       Inspections conducted                               9,561       9,801         10,947
       Re-inspections conducted                            4,146       5,975         6,545
       OHS orders written                                  9,099       12,594        14,454
       Unique work sites visited                           7,092       7,548         8,532
       New businesses contacted for the first time         12,342      14,603        15,849
       Online resources viewed                             652,794     696,188       698,704

OHS officers issued 14,454 orders in 2024-25, compared to 12,594 in 2023-24. OHS officers use a
risk-based approach to compliance, focusing on issues with the highest risk of worker injury to
monitor work site party compliance. Employers receive OHS orders when there is evidence of
non-compliance with OHS legislation. OHS orders include compliance orders, stop work orders and
stop use orders.

Occupational Health and Safety Contact Centre

The Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) Contact Centre helps provide Albertans with information
related to OHS legislation. The contact centre also receives complaints and incident notifications
through telephone calls and emails.

In 2024-25, the OHS Contact Centre
received 12,977 telephone inquiries                 Occupational Health and Safety Contact Centre
(13,155 in 2023-24) and 4,522 email
inquiries (5,143 in 2023-24) from both                            2023-23    2023-24     2024-25
workers and employers seeking additional            Telephone
information and guidance. OHS continues             inquiries     15,446     13,155      12,977
to make efforts to ensure that public facing
                                                    Email
webpages and resource documents
                                                    inquiries     5,095      5,143       4,522
provide Albertans answers to the most
                                                    Total
common questions.
                                                    inquiries     20,541     18,298      17,499



Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                    43
Results Analysis



Surveillance, Research and Potentially Serious Incidents Program

The Occupational Health and Safety Act requires prime contractors or employers (if there is not a
prime contractor) to investigate potentially serious incidents (PSIs) that occur on work sites. Once
the investigation is complete, a report is submitted via the OHS Online Incident Reporting service. A
worker may also choose to report an incident to the OHS Contact Centre. A PSI is reportable when
the incident had a likelihood of causing serious injury or illness and there is a reasonable cause to
believe that corrective action may need to be taken to prevent reoccurrence. A PSI is not limited to
workers. If someone who is not a worker is involved, the incident is considered to be a PSI if it
resulted from work activities at the work site or could have happened to a worker.

Aggregate PSI data summary reports are shared monthly with external health and safety
associations and are used to inform program delivery within the department. Quarterly PSI data is
provided to Energy Safety Canada as part of an information sharing agreement. Department staff
worked to raise awareness of PSIs through presentations to health and safety associations and
Certificate of Recognition Certifying Partners.

In 2024-25, 514 PSIs were submitted, with 27 serious incidents identified. The department
continues to distribute monthly PSI awareness correspondence, amounting to 2,344 emails or
paper letters sent, in 2024-25, to employers that may have an unreported PSI, based on Workers’
Compensation Board claims data. Following correspondence, 4.9 per cent of employers submitted a
PSI.

Education and Outreach of Occupational Health and Safety Information Resources

The Occupational Health and Safety Prevention Initiative clarifies priorities of the Alberta OHS
system based on evidence and consultation with all parties, including employers, health and safety
associations, labour organizations, service providers, the Worker’s Compensation Board,
government and workers, among others who all have a role to play in ensuring the system works as
needed. The initiative supports the use of best practices for an effective OHS system through
education campaigns based in user-centered design and knowledge translation principles.

The long-term goals of the initiative are:

     •   workplaces engage in behaviour that supports preventing priority diseases in and outside of
         their workplace;
     •   reducing incidents of slips, trips and falls, musculoskeletal disorders injuries and
         psychosocial disease and injuries;
     •   system partners increase participation in educational opportunities to prevent priority
         diseases and injuries; and
     •   increasing sharing and partnership of system partners’ resources for coordination and
         alignment.

In 2024-25, the department connected with 47 organizations, attended 40 events and engaged with
an estimated 6,000 participants. These activities support an understanding of and compliance with
Alberta’s OHS legislation, raise awareness and increase understanding of OHS best practices.




44                                                       Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                         Results Analysis



Supporting Psychological Health in First Responders Grant

The Supporting Psychological Health in First Responders Grant (SPHIFR) program provides grants
to improve services for first responders who are living with or are at risk of developing
post-traumatic stress injuries (PTSI). Services that the grants support include early intervention
and resilience building. The grant program has two streams: services, which focuses on supporting
not-for-profit organizations in the delivery of services to first responders; and applied research,
which supports research to inform prevention or interventions for PTSIs. The budget for the
program is $1.5 million per year. In 2024-25, 59 SPHIFR applications were received were accepted.
Six services-stream and six applied research stream applications were approved for funding. One
of the services-stream and two of the research stream recipients have received SPHIFR funding in
the past, highlighting their commitment and excellence in supporting the mental health of first
responders and emergency workers. Applicants estimate that the mental health of over 3,500 first
responders and emergency workers in Alberta will be directly or indirectly supported through
SPHIFR funding in this cycle of the program.

Heroes’ Fund

The Heroes’ Fund recognizes the sacrifices of first responders who die as a result of performing
their duties. A one-time, tax-free payment of $100,000 is provided to eligible families of first
responders, including police officers, firefighters, paramedics, sheriffs and provincial correctional
officers. Payments administered from the Heroes’ Fund are separate from regular workers’
compensation fatality benefits.

On April 29, 2024, the Heroes’ Fund eligibility was expanded to include the families of fallen
wildland firefighters. The expansion saw eligibility extended to workers who fight, suppress or
extinguish a wildfire, such as firefighters on the ground and helicopter and water bomber crews.

The Heroes’ Fund supported 18 families in 2024-25 (with total funding of $1.8 million), compared
to 12 families in 2023-24. The fund pays for fatality benefits in the year in which they are accepted
versus when deaths may have occurred; WCB-Alberta’s adjudication process can take time and
invoices can be received by the department at a later date. The Government of Alberta created a
regulation to increase funding so that all eligible families received the payment. The Heroes’ Fund
has supported 76 families since its creation.

Engaging New Businesses

Contacting newly established
businesses provides an                New Employer Contact Program
opportunity to proactively engage
and educate employers on OHS                               2022-23 2023-24          2024-25
and employment standards              Number of new
requirements and build effective      employers
programs. Beginning in 2021-22,       contacted            12,342       14,603      15,849
the new employer contact
program began contacting all newly registered Workers’ Compensation Board employers by email.
The email included an information package with important OHS and Employment Standards
legislated requirements for new businesses. Employers are invited to contact the OHS Contact
Centre if they have questions or need more information. A total of 15,849 emails were delivered to
new employers in 2024-25.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                       45
Results Analysis



Partnerships in Injury Reduction – Certificate of Recognition Program

Partnerships in Injury Reduction is a
voluntary program where Certifying             Certificate of Recognition Holders
Partners/safety associations, industry,
the Workers’ Compensation Board (WCB)                         2022-23        2023-24      2024-25
and government collaborate to support          Number of
employers to build effective health and        COR holders 10,230            9,834        9,888
safety management systems. Under the           Number of
program, employer participants register        workers
and receive training from one of 10            covered
Certifying Partners, implement or              under COR      761,797        749,316      822,433
improve their health and safety                % of
management systems and then undergo            workforce
an audit conducted by an auditor who is        covered        39.9%          37.3%        40.1%
trained and certified by their Certifying
Partner. If the employer successfully passes the audit, a Certificate of Recognition (COR) is jointly
issued by the department and the Certifying Partner. By improving health and safety, the social and
financial costs of workplace injury and illness are reduced.

As of March 31, 2025, there are 9,888 COR holders across Alberta covering about 40.1 per cent of
the total Alberta workforce (reported to the WCB in 2024). This represents a 2.8 per cent increase
from the previous year. Partnerships in Injury Reduction also conducted four quality assurance
audits and 70 on-site audit reviews in 2024-25.

Occupational Health and Safety Investigations

In 2024-25, investigations were initiated for 721 reportable incidents including traumatic incidents
and fatalities. This is a considerable increase from the 586 reportable incidents in 2023-24. This
rise in numbers is likely attributable to a higher number of actual incidents occurring, but is also a
result of dedicated efforts by OHS to increase worksite party awareness of serious incident
reporting requirements and active work to address the historic issue of underreporting and report
suppression. The work being done by OHS to address underreporting is anticipated to have a
corresponding upward effect on the number of serious incidents reported. As such, this year’s
number represents some success in those efforts to tackle underreporting and is also more
reflective than previous years of the true number of serious incident occurrences in Alberta.

Charges were laid in 18 cases against work site parties in violation of the Occupational Health and
Safety Act, Regulation and Code, compared to 19 in 2023-24. These charges represent the most
serious OHS infractions. Convictions in the year resulted in monetary fines totaling $5.77 million
(compared to $3.60 million in 2023-24). The amount of each monetary fine can fluctuate based on
the type of infractions and the number of convictions each year. These fines ranged from $90,000 to
$1.25 million. The number of charges laid depends on several factors, including the number of
serious incidents that occur. The fine amounts depend on the specific facts of each case, including
instances of noncompliance and whether it can be proven that it was reasonable for the work site
party to address the unsafe work conditions leading to the incident. OHS recommends charges
when it is believed that there are reasonable and probable grounds for the offences that have been
identified as a result of the investigation.




46                                                       Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



The Occupational Health and Safety Act has provisions for the courts to consider when sentencing
work site parties. Having regard for the nature of the offence, the courts may impose a creative
sentence where fines are directed towards projects, programs, research or education that will
further the goal of achieving healthy and safe work sites. In some instances, work site parties are
also placed on enhanced regulatory supervision with probation-like conditions that can include
public acknowledgement of the offence, specific health and safety training courses and an external
audit of their health and safety management program.

Creative sentencing was initiated 10 times in 2024-25. From these sentences, a total of
$3.64 million (included in the $5.77 million in fines referenced above) was ordered to be paid to
not-for-profit organizations, educational institutions and to health and safety associations to
further the goal of achieving healthy and safe works sites. In 2024-25, two companies were placed
on enhanced regulatory supervision (corporate probation) and were required to comply with
specific conditions (e.g., publicly acknowledge the offense, undertake specific health and safety
training courses). In addition, there were no charges laid regarding a breach of Enhanced
Regulatory Supervision conditions.

Occupational Health and Safety Specialized Professional Services

Specialized Professional Services (SPS) strives to reduce occupational related illness and injuries in
Alberta by supporting OHS program delivery and external stakeholders with technical and subject
matter expertise (SME). SPS supports inspection and investigation activities by providing technical
expertise in the fields of engineering, occupational medicine, occupational hygiene, ergonomics and
mining. Key activities include providing SME for complex inspections and investigations, expert
witness services in support of prosecutions, administration and delivery of regulated programs,
review and issuance of legislative variances and support for legislation development. In 2024-25,
SPS completed:

      •    265 activities in support of regulated programs;
      •    573 SME support activities for compliance and investigation units; and
      •    40 legislative support activities.

The department issued 40 legislative tools in 2024-25. These tools included allowances, approvals,
acceptances and inter-jurisdictional recognitions. Issuing these tools enabled employers to reduce
legislative burden while still protecting workers.

3.3       Work with employers and employees to promote compliance with employment
          standards by providing timely complaint resolution, effective enforcement and
          assistance to vulnerable workers.

Employment Standards Code

The Employment Standards Code sets out the minimum employment rules that apply to most
workplaces in Alberta. These standards are designed to protect employees and promote fair
treatment in the workplace. They apply to the majority of employers and employees in the
province, excluding those in federally regulated industries such as banking, air transportation and
telecommunications. Standards include minimum wage, overtime pay, vacation pay, general holiday
pay, termination pay and various protected leaves. Employees are encouraged to address
employment standards concerns within their workplace when possible. If resolution cannot be
reached, individuals have the option to file a formal complaint or submit an anonymous tip. Upon
receiving a complaint, Employment Standards will either facilitate a resolution through a complaint
resolution process or proceed with a formal investigation to ensure compliance with the legislation.


Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                    47
Results Analysis



In certain circumstances, an individual employer, a group of employers or an employer association
may apply to the Director of Employment Standards for a variance or exemption from specific
provisions of the Code.

Timely Complaint Resolution

Employment Standards officers
support workers and employers           Employment Standards Complaint Resolution
to resolve complaints if there is
belief that minimum standards                                   2022-23      2023-24       2024-25
have not been met. Officers work        Complaints received     4,140        4,565         5,008
to resolve complaints in a timely       Complaints completed 3,259           4,315         5,591
manner focusing on voluntary            Complaints concluded* 3,324          4,351         5,433
resolution through high-quality,        Percentage of           93%          79%           87%
administratively fair                   complaints completed
investigations.                         within 180 days
                                        Average number of       45           91            72
Each complaint is unique and            days to begin an
complex investigations require          investigation
additional time and resources.          Average days to         101          143           110
While the department strives for        resolve a complaint
timely completion, officers must        *Complaints are not always resolved in the same fiscal year
ensure in all cases that                they are received.
investigations are thorough, of
high quality and fair to all parties.

In 2024-25, 87 per cent of employment standards complaints received were completed within 180
days of the date received, which is an improvement of eight percentage points from the previous
year. This improvement was a result of operational efficiencies including an early resolution pilot
process and streamlining of investigative processes. This was accomplished even with a 10 per cent
increase in complaint volume from the previous year. Complaint volumes have increased at least 10
per cent year-over-year for the past three fiscal years. In 2024-25, the department concluded 117
complaint related inspections compared to 311 in 2023-24. This decrease is representative of a
program delivery focus on reactive complaint volume and not proactive inspection work, which has
resulted in decreasing file inventory levels from 1,700 in 2022-23 to 400, ultimately improving
timely service delivery for Albertans.

A complaint is considered complete when the investigation phase is no longer under the control of
an officer. A complaint is considered concluded when the officer has collected money on behalf of
the complainant or has exhausted all available options for resolving the complaint, whether
through voluntary resolution, issuing an order or decision, the appeal process or the conclusion of
the collections process.

Employment Standards Appeals

The Alberta Labour Relations Board (ALRB) is the appeal body that oversees the appeal of
Employment Standards orders, penalties, declarations, certificates and notices listed in section
95(2) of the Employment Standards Code. Employment Standards received 171 appeals and
completed the processing of 106 appeals overall. For appeals referred to the appeal body, a total of
38 appeals were voluntarily resolved with the parties prior to the hearing date, while 20 were
confirmed, varied or revoked by the ALRB.




48                                                        Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Results Analysis



Voluntary Resolution

If an employee believes their
employer is not fulfilling legislated         Employment Standards Voluntary Resolution
responsibilities, the employer and
employee are encouraged to work                                      2022-23 2023-24        2024-25
together to come to a fair and                Percentage of          84%     84%            83%
equitable resolution. While                   employment
enforcement action by Employment              standards complaints
Standards is possible, a process of           resolved voluntarily
mediation or voluntary resolution             Number of              2,963   3,831          4,923
between an employer and employee              employment
is encouraged to resolve complaints.          standards complaints
Voluntary resolution is a more                within ES mandate
efficient process and can lead to a fair      Number of              2,481   3,199          4,107
arrangement that both parties agree           employment
to, with minimal involvement of an            standards complaints
officer. Each complaint is unique and         resolved voluntarily
not all situations lend themselves to         Number of              3,259   4,315          5,591
voluntary resolution. Where                   employment
voluntary resolution cannot be                standards complaints
achieved, the department takes                completed
appropriate investigation and
enforcement steps.

Employment Standards concluded 5,591 complaints in 2024-25. Of those, 668 complaints were
outside of Employment Standards’ mandate. 4,107 complaints were resolved voluntarily, while the
other 816 complaints required additional enforcement activities. The 2024-25 voluntary resolution
rate was 83 per cent.

A complaint is considered outside of Employment Standards’ mandate when the employer has filed
for bankruptcy, the work is governed by another jurisdiction, such as federal employment
standards or another province, or the claim was submitted outside of the limitation period. Files
identified as outside of Employment Standards mandate are not included in the calculation of the
voluntary resolution rate.

Funds Recovered by Employment Standards for Albertans

In 2024-25, Employment Standards successfully recovered a total of $5,408,046 on behalf of
Albertans through various enforcement and resolution mechanisms. This amount includes:

    •   $264,223 recovered through the appeals process, where decisions were reviewed and
        determined owing to employees;
    •   $1,610,722 collected through collection enforcement actions, ensuring that outstanding
        earnings ordered are paid to employees;
    •   $3,533,101 resolved through the complaint resolution process, where disputes between
        employees and employers were settled voluntarily; and
    •   $189,167 were returned to Alberta employers through the appeal or collection processes.
These efforts reflect a strong commitment to protecting workers’ rights and ensuring fair
compensation for Alberta employees.



Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                   49
Results Analysis



Employment Standards Contact Centre

The Employment Standards Contact Centre        Employment Standards Contact Centre
makes information and education readily
accessible for Albertans. In 2024-25, the                        2022-23 2023-24 2024-25
contact centre received a total of 61,019      Telephone
inquiries (telephone and email) from           inquiries         58,121   56,602     49,756
employees and employers seeking
                                               Email
information and guidance. Total inquiries to
                                               inquiries         12,125   12,293     11,263
the call center dropped from previous years,
                                               Total
potentially due to an increase in education,
                                               inquiries         70,246   68,895     61,019
outreach and partnership activity and
enhanced webpage content. The top trending topics throughout the year included termination,
payment of earnings, hours of work and referrals to other areas.

Suspected Human Trafficking

Employment Standards staff investigate potential non-compliance with employment standards
legislation where signs of human trafficking exist and coordinate a response with the Temporary
Foreign Worker Advisory Office and other enforcement agencies, as appropriate. Additionally, the
department has an information sharing agreement with Employment and Social Development
Canada to enable exchange of temporary foreign worker related information, which helps to
strengthen protections for victims of human trafficking. Employment Standards continues to
address repeat violators and human trafficking related matters through investigations and
inspections. In 2024-25, 472 alleged human trafficking related complaints were received, resulting
in 280 inspections in comparison to 2023-24 where 338 alleged human trafficking related
complaints were received resulting in 169 inspections. The number of human trafficking
inspections increased by 66 per cent from the previous year. Increased human trafficking
complaints may be related to enhanced education, outreach and collaborative partnerships with
other referral agencies and law enforcement including the Government of Alberta Human
Trafficking Working Group.

Employment Standards Administrative Penalties

Administrative penalties encourage compliance with employment standards legislation and may be
issued to employers for failing to comply with an enforcement action or repeated noncompliance.
Standard penalty amounts may begin at $500 and are issued in a progressive manner for repeated
contraventions. Administrative penalties can also be issued for economic benefits derived from
noncompliance. In 2024–25, Employment Standards issued four administrative penalties totaling
$25,500. This reflects an increase from the previous year, when one administrative penalty was
issued in the amount of $1,500. Administrative penalties are an enforcement tool, largely paused
over the past two years to prioritize reactive complaint management, that will gradually resume as
complaint inventory volumes decline. This shift supports a more meaningful comparison of
administrative penalty as an enforcement tool and the data reflects improved reactive complaint
volume management.




50                                                      Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                     Results Analysis



Chronic Non-Compliance

Employment Standards officers identify chronic non-compliance during the triage of all
employment standards complaints. Initially, inspections are conducted to provide one-on-one
education, assess willingness of employers to comply and conduct an audit of
employment records for compliance with minimum employment standards. If additional
complaints or tips are received, advanced enforcement options, including an Order of Officer,
administrative penalties and prosecution may be utilized where employers refuse to comply. In
2024-25, 23 inspections of chronically non-compliant employers were completed.

Employment Standards Anonymous Tips and Inspections

In 2024-25, the department received
1,850 anonymous tips (compared to        Employment Standards Anonymous Tips and
1,369 in 2023-24). Anonymous tips        Inspections
are triaged by Employment Standards
staff and where vulnerable workers                         2022-23       2023-24      2024-25
or chronic non-compliance are            Anonymous tips
identified, an inspection is initiated.  received          1,148         1,369        1,850
This represents a nearly 50 per cent     Inspections
increase from the previous year and      conducted         690           1,026        421
may be attributed to an increase in
education and outreach activities conducted by program delivery during the same year.

The department conducted 421 inspections in 2024-25 (compared to 1,026 in 2023-24). This
decrease is reflective of a program delivery focus on reactive complaint volume reduction versus
conducting proactive field inspections. The Employment Standards inspection process identifies
areas of non-compliance and may require employers to carry out an officer-directed audit to
remedy violations for all affected employees.

Reservist Leave for the 2025 G7 Leaders’ Summit

Reservist Leave is an unpaid, job-protected leave established in employment standards legislation
that allows reservists, who are reserve force members of the Canadian Forces, to take time off work
to participate in military operations or activities. On March 31, 2025, the Reservist Leave
Regulation came into force and temporarily expanded Reservist Leave to allow reservists to take
part in operations and activities related to the 2025 G7 Leaders’ Summit in Kananaskis, Alberta.
This includes the G7 Leaders’ Summit meeting held from June 15-17, 2025, as well as pre- and
post-deployment activities related to the event. The Reservist Leave Regulation expires on August
31, 2025.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                  51
Results Analysis



3.4   Promote effective labour relations dispute resolution through ministry-appointed
      mediators.

Ministry-Appointed Mediation Services

In Alberta, there are approximately 1,340 collective bargaining relationships covering just over
487,000 employees under provincial jurisdiction across all industry sectors. Collective bargaining
agreements must be renegotiated at the end of the fixed term of the agreement. Typically, about
430 collective bargaining agreements are negotiated each year and approximately 80 per cent are
resolved without needing the assistance of a mediator.

            Mediation

                                                            2022-23 2023-24 2024-25
            Number of mediations concluded where a
            ministry-appointed mediator was engaged
            to assist the parties in their negotiations     125         118          94
            Number of mediations with a
            ministry-appointed mediator that were
            settled without a work stoppage                 125         118          85
            Percentage of collective bargaining
            agreements with the assistance of a
            ministry-appointed mediator settled
            without a work stoppage                         100%        100%         90.4%

Mediation services support the labour relations community by providing mediators to assist in the
resolution of collective bargaining disputes and grievance arbitrators to resolve differences arising
from the interpretation, application or operation of a collective agreement. The ministry appoints
independent mediators under the Labour Relations Code, Police Officers Collective Bargaining Act,
Public Service Employee Relations Act and the Post‐secondary Learning Act.

The ministry evaluates the effectiveness of ministry-appointed mediators and tracks numbers of
mediations concluded without a work stoppage. In 2024-25, of the 94 mediations that were
concluded with the assistance of a ministry-appointed mediator, 90.4 per cent were settled without
a work stoppage.

The majority of public sector collective bargaining agreements in the province expired in 2024.
With modest increases in the last round of bargaining, coupled with inflation, expectations are high
with respect to wages. There were nine work stoppages by education support staff, represented by
the Canadian Union of Public Employees, at various school divisions. These commenced in January
and settled in mid-March 2025. This ended the no work stoppage record in the province that had
continued since the first quarter of 2022.




52                                                        Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                              Results Analysis



Union Dues Election

In 2020, the Restoring Balance in Alberta’s Workplaces Act amended Alberta’s labour relations laws
and introduced union dues election rules to protect workers’ choice by making sure that the union
dues, assessments or initiation fees (collectively referred to as dues) collected from workers are not
used to fund political activities, social causes, charities, non-governmental organizations,
organizations supportive of a political party or any other activity outlined in regulation (non-core
activities) unless the worker chooses to do so. Dues for core activities, for example, activities
relating to collective bargaining and representation of dues payers, can continue to be charged by
the union to dues payers without an election.

Unions and other stakeholders, such as charities, have expressed concerns that union dues election
rules have created red tape that has reduced or eliminated union charitable donations. As a result,
the mandate letter for the Minister of Jobs, Economy and Trade issued on July 4, 2023, included
direction to consult with Alberta private sector unions on ways to reduce red tape on aspects of the
Act that made it unduly onerous for unions to make charitable donations.

The department engaged with stakeholders from February 1 to March 31, 2024. In 2024-25, the
department analyzed the feedback received from stakeholders. On April 2, 2025, the Union Dues
Election Engagement What We Heard Report was publicly released and is available on the Open
Government Portal at https://open.alberta.ca/publications/union-dues-election-engagement-
what-we-heard.

3.5   Promote efficient, timely, effective and consistent services through the Alberta Labour
      Relations Board.

Alberta Labour Relations Board
                                                    Alberta Labour Relations Board
During the last year, the Alberta Labour                                2022-23     2023-24      2024-25
Relations Board (ALRB) continued to
                                                    Number of
provide efficient, timely, effective and
                                                    applications         687        716*         734
consistent services to Alberta’s labour             Number of
relations community. The number of                  hearings             629        679*         791
applications filed with the Board                   Number of
increased from 716 applications in                  certification
2023-24 to 734 applications in                      applications
2024-25. This number includes 34                    received by the
appeals under the Occupational Health               Alberta Labour
and Safety Act and 50 appeals under the             Relations Board      121        130          159
Employment Standards Code. The                      Average number of
number of hearings the Board                        days from
conducted increased from 679 in                     acceptance of an
2023-24 to 791 in 2024-25                           application to first
representing 16 per cent increase.                  hearing              54         80           74
                                                    *Numbers were restated to reflect a minor correction
                                                    to ALRB records following routine internal auditing.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                          53
Results Analysis



The ALRB remains committed to scheduling matters in a timely fashion. In 2024-25, the average
number of days from the acceptance of an application to the date of the first hearing was 74 days,
compared to 80 days in 2023-24. A number of factors impact this measure, including the
availability of the parties, the availability of adjudicators and Board Members, in addition to the
number and complexity of matters that came before the Board.

Informal Settlement Process

The ALRB offers informal settlement options to assist parties to resolve disputes prior to the formal
hearing process.

In 2024-25, the Board’s settlement rate was       Alberta Labour Relations Board
61 per cent and above the Board’s target of
57 per cent. Settlement rates vary                                    2022-23      2023-24      2024-25
depending on a variety of factors including       Percentage of
the complexity of the matter, the                 applications,
relationship between the parties, the             with Board
                                                  involvement,
economy and the labour relations climate in
                                                  settled before
general. The Board is exploring                   reaching a
opportunities to assist parties in resolving      formal hearing.     66%          65%          61%
their disputes.

Key Decisions of the Alberta Labour Relations Board

During the 2024-25 fiscal year, the ALRB released a broad range of decisions interpreting different
aspects of Alberta’s labour legislation. ALRB decisions interpreting Alberta’s labour legislation help
provide certainty to stakeholders and are aimed at ensuring the fair and consistent application of
that legislation.

Noteworthy decisions from the Board in 2024-25 included:

     •   United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, Local Union No. 1999 v Cessco
         Fabrication & Engineering Limited, 2024 ALRB 59. The Board provided information on the
         employer’s reinstatement obligations under section 90 of the Labour Relations Code: it said
         employees’ reinstatement rights do not expire just because an Employer’s operations are on
         hold when they make the requests.
     •   United Steel, Paper and Forestry, Rubber, Manufacturing, Energy, Allied Industrial and
         Service Workers International Union (United Steelworkers), Local 1-207 v Starbucks Coffee
         Canada, Inc., 2024 ALRB 65. The Board provided guidance for when it will use its
         reconsideration power under the Labour Relations Code to amend an existing certificate to
         “add-on” previously unrepresented employees from a single-store retail store of the same
         employer. It clarifies the question, in an “add-on” reconsideration application, if whether the
         unit applied for is an appropriate one.
     •   The University of Calgary Graduate Students’ Association v The University of Calgary, 2024
         ALRB 88. The Essential Services Commissioner denied an application for an exemption to
         negotiate or file an essential services agreement. In doing so, she provided more
         information on the meaning of essential services under the Labour Relations Code and
         specifically what it means to endanger the health of the public.




54                                                         Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                           Results Analysis



      •     United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, Local Union No. 1325 v
            Clearstream Energy Services LP, 2024 ALRB 89. The Board clarified its approach to
            employer-initiated revocation applications under the Labour Relations Code. It declined to
            deny revocation based on the likelihood employees would be engaged in the bargaining unit
            in the future as an “other relevant factor” since the pre-conditions for revocation under the
            Code had been met.
      •     United Food and Commercial Workers Canada Union, Local No. 401 v Keywords Studios
            B.C., Inc., 2024 ALRB 95. The Board clarified that applications for assistance with first
            collective agreements under section 92.2 of the Labour Relations Code can be brought at any
            time during negotiations and may be dealt with before bad faith bargaining and unfair
            labour practice complaints to ensure expedient intervention early in new bargaining
            relationships.
      •     The Alberta Union of Provincial Employees v Alberta Health Services, 2025 ALRB 30. The
            Essential Services Commissioner confirmed the standard of the review of an umpire’s
            award under the essential services division of the Labour Relations Code is reasonableness.
            She also provided guidance on when applications should be made.

3.6       Provide timely, fair and efficient appeal services independent of the Workers’
          Compensation Board through the Appeals Commission for Alberta Workers’
          Compensation.

Appeals Commission for Alberta Workers’ Compensation

The Appeals Commission for Alberta Workers’ Compensation is an independent and impartial
tribunal that hears worker and employer appeals arising from Workers’ Compensation Board
(WCB) review bodies. The Appeals Commission is a quasi-judicial tribunal that is independent from
the WCB. The Appeals Commission provides a fair, client-focussed appeal experience. The Appeals
Commission also provides free advocacy services through the Advisor Office and independent
medical review through the Medical Panels Program.

          Appeals Commission

                                                                 2022-23      2023-24     2024-25
          Number of appeals received
                                                                 592          678         782
          Number of appeals concluded
                                                                 487          469         526
          Number of decisions successfully challenged
                                                                  5           4           6
          Average number of days from the date the appeal is
          filed to the first hearing date offered                 151         189         205
          Average number of days from the hearing to the
          decision issued date                                    29          29          24
          Percentage of decisions not challenged, or if
          challenged, supported by the Appeals Commission’s
          reconsideration process, the Court of King’s Bench, the
          Court of Appeal, the Alberta Ombudsman                  99.8%       99.1%       98.9%




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                       55
Results Analysis



Appeals Commission

As of March 31, 2025, the Appeals Commission had 47 adjudicators, which includes the chief
appeals commissioner, 2 vice-chairs, 16 full-time hearing chairs and 28 part-time commissioners.
Approximately 60 per cent of appeals were held in-person by a three-person adjudication panel
(includes teleconference and videoconference hearings).

Timelines and numbers of appeals are affected by a variety of factors, including the economic
environment, changes in legislation and policy, changes in commissioner experience and the rate of
resolution at the Workers’ Compensation Board.

The Appeals Commission received 782 appeals in 2024-25, compared to 678 appeals in 2023-24.
The amount of time to prepare and schedule an appeal was 205 days in 2024-25, compared to 189
days in 2023-24. The increase in this metric is due primarily to a shortage of Hearing Chairs, along
with an increase in the number of new appeals and is actively being addressed. The average
number of days from the hearing date to the decision issued date was 24 days in 2024-25,
compared to 29 days in 2023-24. In 2024-25, 98.9 per cent of decisions (99.1 per cent in 2023-24)
were not challenged, or if challenged, were supported by the Appeals Commission’s reconsideration
process, the Court of King’s Bench, the Court of Appeal or the Alberta Ombudsman.

Advisor Office

The Advisor Office offers employers and injured workers free advice, information and advocacy
services throughout the Workers’
Compensation Board (WCB) appeals           Advisor Office
process. The Advisor Office is an
independent program of the Appeals                                   2022-23 2023-24 2024-25
Commission and is separate from the        Number of
WCB.                                       applications for
                                           service from
In 2024-25, the Advisor Office received    workers                   1,202     1,286     1,891
a total of 2,042 applications (1,453 in    Number    of applications
2023-24) for service and closed 1,349      for service from
files (1,455 in 2023-24). This is an       employers                 150       167       151
increase in applications of 41 per cent.   Number    of worker
As a result of this increase in demand,    files closed
there is currently a waitlist for Advisor                            1,436     1,302     1,204
services. The Advisor Office is taking     Number of
steps to address this by developing an     employer files
enhanced triage system and prioritizing    closed
                                                                     125       153       145
staff recruitment and retention.




56                                                      Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis



Medical Panels for Alberta Workers’ Compensation

The Medical Panels Program provides a               Medical Panels
medical panel convened by the Medical
Panels Commissioner at the request of                                       2022-23 2023-24 2024-25
the Workers’ Compensation Board                     Number of Medical
(WCB) or the Appeals Commission.                    Panel files open
Medical Panels consist of three                     between April 1 and
independent medical experts appointed               March 31                15      17      3
by the Medical Panels Commissioner to               Number of new Medical
address differences in medical opinion              Panel requests received
or other medical questions related to a             from the WCB or the
                                                    Appeals Commission
workers’ compensation claim. The
                                                    between April 1 and
Medical Panels Program is an                        March 31                7       2       1
independent program of the Appeals                  Number of Medical
Commission and is separate from the                 Panel files closed      10      15      2
WCB.

In 2024-25, the Medical Panels Program received a total of one request for a medical panel (two
in 2023-24) and closed two files (15 in 2023-24). When the Appeals Commission assumed
responsibility for the Medical Panels program in 2021, there was a substantial backlog of files due
to process inefficiencies. Through the leadership of the Medical Panels Commissioner and the
dedicated efforts of program staff to streamline workflows, enhance coordination and implement
process improvements, the program achieved a significant reduction in outstanding files over the
past fiscal year.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                     57
Results Analysis



Jobs, Economy and Trade: Performance Indicator 3.a:
Occupational Health and Safety


                                       Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                              2024-25
                   2020-21         2021-22           2022-23             2023-24               Actual

  OHS Field
                   35,306          26,392            21,950              24,565             26,992
  Activities

                                          Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                                2024
                   2020            2021              2022                2023                   Actual


  Lost-Time
                   1.77            1.88              2.00                1.47               1.35
  Claim Rate

  Disabling
                   2.69            2.93              3.09                2.57               2.42
  Injury Rate

OHS Field Activities

Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) laws are in place to ensure workers return home safely at the
end of their shift. Compliance starts with education and ensuring that all work site parties are able
to follow the rules. It is everyone’s responsibility to promote a safe and healthy work culture.

OHS field activities support safe and healthy workplaces. The OHS program undertakes a number of
field activities based on proactive and reactive work as part of a balanced approach to regulatory
enforcement and to help workplaces become more self-reliant.

In 2024-25, the department conducted 26,992 OHS field activities, compared to 24,565 in 2023-24,
representing a 10 per cent increase. The increase was primarily due to a higher-than-usual field
activities conducted in 2024-25 to support the province’s proactive work. The 2024-25 result was
roughly equal to the 2021-22 result, after dropping from the highest point in 2020-21 over the past
five years.

OHS field activities include inspections, re-inspections, investigations, continuation of
investigations, presentations, meetings and publications delivered. The number of continuation of
investigations has significantly increased from 878 in 2022-23 to 1,311 in 2023-24 and then to
1,439 in 2024-25. These activities are follow-ups on incidents reported and they can vary greatly
depending on individual circumstances.

The number of meetings fluctuated the most among these metrics in the last five years. It dropped
sharply from over 2,400 per year before 2020-21 to 1,202 in 2021-22 then to just over 600 in
2022-23 and 2023-24. The number of meetings increased slightly to 746 in 2024-25.




58                                                          Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                         Results Analysis




 OHS Field Activities Breakdown

                                        2020-21     2021-22    2022-23      2023-24      2024-25
 Inspections                            14,502      11,798     9,571        9,801        10,947
 Re-inspections                         3,175       3,770      4,146        5,975        6,545
 Investigations                         1,138       856        888          859          1,031
 Continuations of Investigations        899         736        878          1,311        1,439
 Presentations                          8           21         7            10           17
 Meetings                               2,489       1,202      637          629          746
 Publications Delivered                 13,095      8,009      5,823        5,980        6,267
 Total OHS Field Activities             35,306      26,392     21,950       24,565       26,992

Lost-Time Claim Rate

The lost-time claim rate represents the number of lost-time claims per 100 person-years worked,
focusing specifically on cases where workers have experienced injuries or diseases resulting in time
loss from work. Fluctuations in these rates highlight the challenge of reducing and maintaining
them at a low level.

The lost-time claim rate in 2024 was 1.35, down from 1.47 in 2023, representing an eight per cent
decrease. This rate is the lowest in the last five years and the lowest level reached since 2016.
COVID-19 remained to be one of the causes of workplace related injuries and diseases in 2024,
accounting for three per cent of the total lost-time claims identified by Workers’ Compensation
Board – Albert (WCB). Excluding COVID-19 claims, the lost-time claim rates were 1.43 for 2020,
1.50 for 2021, 1.49 for 2022, 1.38 for 2023 and 1.31 for 2024. Additionally, there were an
undetermined number of lost-time injury claims that were related to COVID-19, but not necessarily
directly a result of COVID-19 (e.g., lost-time claims for skin conditions caused by personal
protective equipment).

Despite being the industry sector with the highest lost-time claim rate over the past five years, the
provincial and municipal government, education and health services had the third lowest
percentage growth in its workforce, increasing by 14 per cent in person-years worked between
2020 and 2024. Only the agriculture and forestry sector and the mining and petroleum sector had a
lower growth rate. However, its lost-time claim rate showed a decrease of nearly 24 per cent, from
3.41 in 2020 to 2.61 in 2024. Manufacturing, processing and packaging had the largest drop in
lost-time claim rate (54 per cent) in the last five years, followed by agriculture and forestry, which
experienced a 42 per cent lost-time claim rate decrease in the same reporting period.

Many factors can influence the lost-time claim rate and the disabling injury rate. These may include,
but are not limited to, the workers’ compensation system processes such as the eligibility criteria
and the claim adjudication process, the efforts made by employers to implement safety programs
and to foster a culture of safety among their workers and the attitudes and behaviours of employers
and workers, such as their awareness of risks and their willingness to report injuries. In addition,
external forces arising from the economic cycle also have an impact on the injury rates.

Irrespective of external factors outside of the department’s control, it has always been a priority to
lower injury rates over time to ensure all Albertans can work in a safe and healthy environment.
The department is striving to bring these rates down by working closely with all stakeholders,
including employers, workers, industry associations and the WCB. The department has many
programs that promote safe and healthy practices in the workplace and influence these results
including raising awareness to promote health and safety through educational materials on how to
work safely and stay healthy on the job and via the Certificate of Recognition program, which is


Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                     59
Results Analysis



awarded to employers that establish standardized health and safety management systems. The
department continues to update metrics to identify employers with a high rate of injury and disease
and works with them to improve their workplace health and safety practices and management
systems. Programming is continuously adjusted to address emerging concerns to prevent
work-related injuries, illnesses and deaths.

Disabling Injury Rate

The disabling injury rate decreased to 2.42 in 2024 from 2.57 in 2023. The disabling injury rate in
2024 was the lowest it had been in the last ten years. Without COVID-19 claims, the disabling injury
rates were 2.34 for 2020, 2.55 for 2021, 2.58 for 2022, 2.48 for 2023 and 2.37 for 2024.
Manufacturing, processing and packaging had the largest drop in disabling injury rate (31 per cent)
in the last five years, followed by agriculture and forestry, which experienced a 25 per cent
disabling injury rate decrease in the same reporting period. Provincial and municipal government,
education and health services experienced the third-largest decrease in disabling injury rates,
which declined by 18 per cent over the past five years.

Supplemental Information

In 2024, 170 workers died as identified in WCB accepted fatality claims, an increase from 106 in
2023. Within these claims, 52 fatalities were the result of traumatic workplace incidents, which is
higher than the 29 cases in 2023.

This fatality data reflects cases accepted by the Workers’ Compensation Board of Alberta for
compensation purposes. It also reflects workers who died in Alberta, regardless of whether the
work they performed is in provincially or federally regulated workplaces. Due to differences in
jurisdictional coverage, it does not necessarily represent all fatal workplace incidents under the
jurisdiction of Alberta Occupational Health and Safety, which are typically fewer.

Jobs, Economy and Trade: Performance Measure 3.b:
      Collective Bargaining cases with the assistance of a ministry-appointed mediator

                     Prior Years’ Results
                                                              2024-25         2024-25
                                                               Target          Actual
 2020-21           2021-22      2022-23      2023-24

 97%               96%          100%         100%           98%             90.4%


The majority of public sector collective bargaining agreements in the province expired in 2024.
With modest increases in the last round of bargaining coupled with inflation, expectations are high
with respect to wages. There were nine work stoppages by education support staff represented by
the Canadian Union of Public Employees at various school divisions which commenced in January
and settled in mid-March 2024. This ended the no work stoppage record in the province that was
maintained since the first quarter of 2022.




60                                                       Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                          Results Analysis



Jobs, Economy and Trade: Performance Measure 3.c:
      Alberta Labour Relations Board decisions rendered within 90 calendar days

                    Prior Years’ Results
                                                               2024-25         2024-25
                                                                Target          Actual
 2020-21         2021-22          2022-23           2023-24

 68%             67%              70%               66%       85%            78%


This performance measure reflects the Alberta Labour Relations Board’s (Board) commitment to
issue decisions in a timely fashion. In 2024-25, 78 per cent of decisions were rendered within 90
calendar days from the completion of the hearing.

While this result is below the stretch target of 85 per cent, it is a significant improvement over last
year’s result.

This measure is impacted by the complexity of matters that come before the Board as a result of
amendments to legislation and an expansion of the Board’s jurisdiction. For example, Employment
Standards and Occupational Health and Safety appeals resulted in an additional 84 applications to
the Board in 2024-25. Amendments to legislation lead to novel issues being raised for the Board’s
consideration and add complexity to the hearing process. This results in additional hearing and
writing time for adjudicators. In 2024-25, the number of hearings conducted by the Board
increased approximately 16 per cent from 679 to 791.

Another factor that impacts this measure is the introduction of case management conferences prior
to a hearing, which was in response to the move to virtual hearings as a result of the COVID-19
pandemic. These conferences proved so successful in streamlining and increasing the efficiency of
Board hearings that the practice has been extended to all hearings whether they are conducted
virtually or not. However, while pre-hearing conferences result in a more efficient hearing, they
require preparation and increase the number of hearings conducted by the Board’s adjudicators
which in turn impacts the time available to write decisions.

The Board attributes the improvement in the measure to being fully staffed with adjudicators,
which allowed for more time to be allocated for writing decisions.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                      61
Results Analysis



Outcome Four: Parents and guardians have access to high-quality, inclusive and affordable
early learning and child care options
Significant investments make high-quality, inclusive child care accessible and affordable for families
and promote a sustainable future for the early learning and child care sector. Child care allows
parents to pursue opportunities and achieve financial independence and security, which benefits
families, communities and the economy.

Key Objectives

4.1     Increase access to child care through initiatives that support the creation of high-
        quality, accessible, affordable and inclusive licensed programs enabling parents to
        participate in and support Alberta’s economy.

The ministry provided $1,558 million for Child Care, where $797 million in affordability grants
were provided to licensed childcare providers to reduce child care fees for children enrolled in
child care spaces in daycare facilities, family day homes and preschools. $194 million in child care
subsidies helped offset the cost of care for the families of 67,500 children.

Affordability – Lower Child Care Fees

Alberta’s government is committed to providing affordable child care for families without
compromising quality. Access to affordable child care is essential for families and the economy.
Replacing parent fees with government funding keeps more money in the pockets of families and
provides more flexibility for parents. The department is mandated to provide access to child care
for children up to kindergarten age through investments under two agreements with the federal
government: the $3.8 billion Canada-Alberta Canada-Wide Early Learning and Child Care
(CACWELCC) Agreement and the $356 million Canada-Alberta Early Learning and Child Care
Agreement.

Under these federal-provincial agreements, out-of-pocket parent fees for children up to
kindergarten age will be reduced to $10 per day by March 2026. In April 2024, the Government of
Alberta and the Government of Canada agreed on Alberta’s 2023-2026 CACWELCC Action Plan. The
three-year plan guides Alberta’s investments and initiatives to support Alberta’s efforts to increase
access to affordable, high-quality and inclusive early learning and child care.

                                       Average Monthly Childcare Cost
 $1,200

 $1,000

     $800

     $600

     $400

     $200

      $0
                   2020-21       2021-22             2022-23              2023-24              2024-25




62                                                          Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



Since the signing of the CACWELCC Agreement in November 2021, child care fees for families with
children up to kindergarten age in licensed spaces were reduced by an average of 50 per cent in
January 2022, with further reductions to an average of $15 per day in January 2024—saving
families approximately $750 per month or $9,000 per year per child, regardless of income.

In 2024-25, $797.2 million was provided to licensed child care providers through Affordability
Grants to reduce child care fees for 129,000 children up to kindergarten age, enrolled in child care
spaces in daycare facilities, family day homes and preschools. Additionally, in 2024-25, $84.2
million in Cost Increase Replacement Funding was provided to programs receiving the Affordability
Grant to help providers manage rising operational costs without passing them on to families.

The department also supported families with children up to kindergarten age by providing a child
care subsidy for families with an annual household income of less than $180,000, further reducing
fees. In 2024-25, $194 million in subsidies was provided. As of March 31, 2025, 67,500 children
were receiving some level of subsidy, making child care more affordable for families.

Alberta’s government recognizes the importance of out-of-school care programs. In 2024-25, $56.8
million in subsidies were provided to school-aged children in households with an annual income of
less than $90,000. As of March 31, 2025, approximately 13,000 school-aged children received some
level of subsidy.

Further, the subsidy rate for out-of-school care increased from $366 to $644 during July and August
2024 to help families offset the higher costs of full-time child care during the summer months.

The department continued to offer the Infant Care Incentive program to support affordability for
families with infants. The program incentivizes licensed child care providers to offer child care
spaces for infants up to 18 months of age by offering providers $150 per month for infants
receiving care. The program provided a total of $15.42 million to licensed child care providers in
2024-25.

In July 2024, nearly 2,000 facility-based operators, family day home educators, family day home
agencies and preschools completed the Early Learning and Child Care Cost Questionnaire which
aimed to gather a better understanding the costs to deliver high-quality child care for children up to
kindergarten age. The questionnaire informed the development of an early learning and child care
funding approach and continued to support ongoing discussions with the federal government on
Alberta's unique child care system.

In January 2025, Alberta’s government announced that as of April 1, 2025, it would implement a
new flat monthly parent fee of $326.25 for full-time care; equivalent to $15 per day. This, in
addition to affordability grants and child care subsidies, reduced child care fees to make
high-quality, inclusive and affordable child care more accessible.

Payments to Child Care Providers

The department continued to provide claim advance payments to child care providers, beginning in
March 2024, enabling them to receive grant payments sooner. Child care programs receive
approximately 80 per cent of their monthly claim at the beginning of each month to reduce financial
pressures on providers.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                    63
Results Analysis



Increasing Affordable Child Care Spaces

Under the CACWELCC Agreement, Alberta committed to creating up to 68,700 child care spaces for
children up to kindergarten age, including at least 42,500 non-profit spaces and up to 26,200
private spaces. As part of the 2023-2026 CACWELCC Action Plan, the timeline to open child care
spaces was extended by one year from March 2026 to March 2027 in recognition of the time it takes
to create new child care spaces.

As of March 31, 2025, 142,700 licensed child care spaces were available across the province for
children up to kindergarten age, including 58,800 non-profit spaces and 83,900 private spaces. In
2024-25, 14,300 net new licensed spaces were created, an increase of 11 per cent compared to
2023-24.

In 2024-25, the department continued to support the creation of licensed child care spaces through
the Space Creation Grant Program, providing 108 grants totaling $31.8 million to develop
approximately 8,000 new spaces. Since the program launched in 2022, a total of 242 grant
recipients have received $68.1 million, resulting in approximately 16,900 planned spaces, with
10,600 already established.

Alberta’s Space Creation Grant played a key role in supporting the development of new, affordable
spaces. However, following the announcement of $53 million in additional federal funding through
the Early Learning and Child Care Infrastructure Fund in spring 2024, the department introduced a
renewed approach focused on public and non-profit providers.

In 2024-25, the Space Creation Grant intake ended and the Building Blocks Capital Grant Program
launched in January 2025. With a total investment of up to $53 million, this program offers
one-time capital funding to support the creation of full-time licensed early learning and child care
spaces in non-profit and public facility-based programs. It features two funding streams—Major
Capital and Minor Capital Grants—and prioritizes projects in high-need areas. The program’s first
intake received 72 applications, requesting nearly double the available funding, highlighting strong
sector demand and interest.

Additionally, the Child Care Community Needs Assessment initiative was launched in January 2025
to better understand the unique child care demands of diverse and vulnerable communities. This
collaboration with municipalities, First Nations and Metis Settlements aims to identify gaps in child
care access and inform community-driven solutions for more inclusive care options.

Family Day Home Modernization

The Government of Alberta introduced new contracts for licensed family day home agencies on
January 1, 2025, to offer a consistent and transparent funding model to agencies that oversee family
day home programs in the province. In 2024-25, all 86 Family Day Home Agency Contracts were
signed. As of March 31, 2025, there are approximately 18,700 spaces and 3,500 educators in
home-based child care in Alberta. This is an increase of 1,400 spaces and increase of 260 educators
compared to 2023-24.

Enhancements to family day home monitoring were also made to ensure adherence to contract
requirements and alignment with provincial legislation and standards. Increased monitoring also
helps to prevent fraud, promote accountability, ensure the integrity of financial information and
improve operational efficiency.




64                                                       Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                 Results Analysis



Early Learning and Child Care Act Amendments

To maintain public trust in our child care system, Alberta’s government passed amendments to the
Early Learning and Child Care (ELCC) Act in December 2024. These changes aim to increase
oversight, provide greater transparency, shut down unsafe programs and administer penalties
when providers fail to meet safety standards. The amendments also enabled the implementation of
recommendations from the Food Safety and Licensed Facility-Based Child Care Review Panel. Most
changes took effect on April 30, 2025, with a new administrative penalty framework for license
holders and early childhood educators coming into force on September 30, 2025.

Child Care Licensing
                                                    Child Care Licensing
To ensure the safety, well-being and
developmental needs of children in care             New licenses     2022-23    2023-24      2024-25
are being consistently met, the Early               issued
Learning and Child Care (ELCC) Act                  Facility-based   161        193          230
requires a facility-based licence to                providers
operate for facilities that provide care for        Family Day       18         7            6
seven or more children. In 2024-25, 236             Homes
new child care licenses were issued,
                                                    Total            179        200          236
including 230 for facility-based and six
for family day home programs.

Variance requests are also included under the ELCC Act and are used by license holders to request a
variation on their license. Variances include, for example, the location of the program premises or
the maximum number of children cared for. In 2024-25, 292 variance requests were approved,
including 269 for facility-based programs and 23 for family day home programs.

All child care programs and family day home agencies and providers are expected to be in
compliance to the ELCC Act and Regulation and Family Day Home Standards at all times. When this
does not occur and a non-compliance is identified, child care programs and family day home
agencies are provided an opportunity to remedy the issues. In 2024-25, the department conducted
9,000 inspections, including 700 complaint investigations. Of these inspections, two resulted in
non-compliances being issued.

In 2024-25, a total of eight licences were cancelled (six             Did You Know?
were due to non-compliance issues, two were for
inactivity/non-contact) by enforcement of legislation.                If a licensed facility-based child
Since February 1, 2021, when the amended ELCC Act came                care program fails to comply
into force, a total of 14 licences have been cancelled by             with legislation, its license can
enforcement from licensing. Licence cancellation is a last            be suspended and a
resort with compliance being the goal to ensure the safety            probationary license issued. If
of children being provided care in licensed facilities.               the program does not comply
                                                                      during probation, the license
The Early Learning and Child Care Act also permits                    will not be reinstated, resulting
unlicensed child care options to care for up to six children          in the program's closure.
not including the caregiver’s own children. Unlicensed
child care includes nannies, private family day homes and
informal care arrangements with family members, neighbours or friends. The department is
required to receive and investigate complaints when there is reason to believe an unlicensed child
care provider is caring for more than six children excluding their own or an imminent threat exists
to the health, safety or welfare of any child within their care. In 2024-25, 41 complaints were
received for unlicensed providers and six stop orders were subsequently issued upon investigation.


Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                             65
Results Analysis



Supporting Inclusion

Inclusion in child care means that children of all backgrounds and abilities can access supportive
and high-quality care delivered by licensed child care providers and early childhood educators
(ECEs). It allows parents to feel confident that their child is safe, valued and cared for in an
environment that accommodates their needs. In 2024-25, Alberta continued to prioritize inclusion
in child care through several key initiatives aimed at increasing access and fostering supportive
environments for all children, regardless of background or ability.

The Inclusive Child Care Program is voluntary and uses evidence-based resources, on-site
consultation and training to support educators’ inclusive practices. Such practices enable licensed
child care programs to have the capacity to care for children with extra support needs and to
receive short-term, intensive resources and supports that include:

     •   access to on-site coaching and consultation, training and professional development;
     •   short-term funding to address the cost of extra staff so primary educators can increase
         knowledge and skill development to include children with extra support needs; and
     •   referrals to relevant community supports and assisting child care programs and families to
         navigate these services.

In 2024-25, five regional community partner agencies received $8.5 million to provide inclusive
child care coaching and capacity-building supports. In total, 472 licensed child care programs
participated in the Inclusive Child Care Program in 2024-25, compared to 469 programs in
2023-24.

The Inclusive Spaces Program Grant was launched in late 2024, with a focus on enhancing
accessibility and inclusivity in licensed child care programs so that all children can fully participate
in early learning. This two-year, $15 million initiative supports infrastructure upgrades and the
procurement of inclusive resources, such as sensory-friendly spaces, adaptive equipment and
culturally responsive materials for existing non-profit, private and family day home facilities. The
first intake resulted in over $5.1 million awarded to 105 providers. Two additional funding rounds
are planned for 2025 to further support accessibility and equity in child care settings.

A continued partnership with PolicyWise for Children and Families was made possible through a $3
million multi-year grant for the Culturally Responsive Child Care Project. The initiative aims to
provide cultural resources for child care providers to better meet the needs of underserved
populations, including racialized, Indigenous and Francophone Albertans. This included the launch
of Spark: A Guide to Culturally Responsive Early Learning and Child Care in October 2024. Since its
launch, there have been 6,391 visits to the website, 250 downloads of the guide and 1,095 visits to
the online Resource Hub. Additionally, 139 participants have attended Introductory Leader
Training, 129 have registered for online training and 15 Early Learning and Child Care programs
have participated in the Spark Mentorship Pilot as of January 31, 2025.




66                                                         Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                           Results Analysis



The department also provided funding for families accessing Family Supports for Children with
Disabilities (FSCD) Program, which is operated by Seniors, Community and Social Services. The
FSCD program provides a range of child care services to support families with extraordinary
disability-related child care costs while parents are at work, school or attending training. Additional
staffing support can be funded for those children who, due to their disability, require additional
supervision beyond a child care centre’s normal staffing levels. Eligibility and services are reviewed
annually, at a minimum, to determine if the types of services and support continue to be required.
In 2024-25, the department funded $10.6 million to provide additional staffing support for 604
clients. This is approximately 23 per cent more than the 493 clients supported with $7.8 million in
funding in 2023-24.

Additionally, the Child Care Community Needs Assessment initiative was launched in January 2025
to better understand the unique child care demands of diverse and vulnerable communities. This
collaboration with municipalities, First Nations and Metis Settlements aims to identify gaps in child
care access and inform community-driven solutions for more inclusive care options.

Initial response from child care providers has been strong, reflecting the sector’s commitment to
inclusion and community responsiveness. These initiatives contribute significantly to improving
the accessibility and quality of child care for all families, particularly those in underserved areas.

Child Care Digital Transformation

The department prioritized an innovative transformation of digital services associated with child
care regulation and delivery in 2024-25. The increased volume of both child care providers and
parents utilizing child care in Alberta requires targeted enhancements and streamlining of intake,
registration, payment and reporting processes.

In 2024-25, the department delivered training to child care providers on the use of the new Child
Care Licensing Portal. All child care providers were trained and had access to new services within
the Child Care Licensing Portal by July 31, 2024. The Family Day Home Agency Contract also moved
to the Child Care Licensing Portal to improve efficiency and accountability for family day home
agencies.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                        67
Results Analysis



4.2      Enhance quality licensed child care through workforce investments that strengthen the
         recruitment and retention of skilled early childhood educators and support their
         capacity to deliver quality child care.

The department recognizes the critical role of Early Childhood Educators (ECEs) and is committed
to supporting and strengthening the child care workforce. Educated and experienced ECEs are the
foundation of high-quality child care. As tens of thousands more child care spaces open in Alberta
over the coming years, ECEs will continue to play a crucial role in ensuring the safety and
well-being of children in their care.

Certification
                                               ECE Certification
In Alberta, the Early Learning and Child
Care Act and the Early Learning and
Child Care Regulation require                                     2022-23 2023-24 2024-25
individuals who work in licensed child         Level 1 ECEs       11,000     12,700       13,500
care programs to have provincial               Level 2 ECEs       3,800      4,500        5,400
certification issued by the department.        Level 3 ECEs       9,300      10,600       12,400
This applies to both facility-based            Total ECEs         24,100     27,900       31,300
programs (daycare, out-of-school-care          *The numbers in this table show the total number
and preschool) and home-based                  of ECEs with certification as of the end of each
programs (family day home educators)           fiscal year - not the number of new certifications
operating under a licensed agency.             granted that particular fiscal year.

Since signing the CACWELCC Agreement in 2021, Alberta’s certified ECE workforce has experienced
significant growth. As of March 31, 2025, 31,300 ECEs were certified in Alberta. Of these, 13,500
were certified as Level 1 (free 45-hour orientation course or equivalency), 5,400 were certified as
Level 2 (one-year certificate or equivalency) and 12,400 were certified as Level 3 (two-year
diploma/degree or equivalency).

                               Level 1 staff    Level 2 staff      Level 3 staff

     16,000
     14,000
     12,000
     10,000
      8,000
      6,000
      4,000
      2,000
         -
                   2020-21       2021-22              2022-23                2023-24           2024-25


The department removed barriers to entry into the child care sector and attaining Level 1 ECE
certification by continuing to deliver the expanded Level 1 Child Care course, offered to eligible
Alberta residents in both English and French. The course also provides specialized modules for
Family Day Homes to ensure that relevant education is delivered to prospective home-based child
care providers. Course attendees must be at least 16 years of age, a Canadian citizen, Permanent
Resident Card holder or a Work or Study Visa holder legally residing in Alberta and without
post-secondary educational studies in early learning and child care.


68                                                              Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



In 2024-25, 34,359 individuals registered for the Level 1 Early Childhood Education Orientation
course, including 33,339 in the English course and 1,020 in the French course. This is a continuous
enrollment, self-paced course, with 5,831 people (5,543 in English and 288 in French) completing
their coursework in 2024-25.

The department continues to invest in strategic partnerships with community organizations and
post-secondary institutions aimed at strengthening the ECE workforce, through grants to the
Calgary Immigrant Women’s Association (CIWA), Child Development Dayhomes Fort McMurray
(CDDHFM) and the YMCA of Northern Alberta (YNAB).

CIWA, in partnership with Bow Valley College, provides virtual early learning and child care
education tailored to the specific needs of immigrant and vulnerable women. The department
allocated $1.1 million in 2024-25, to increase ECE certification levels for 200 ECEs (120 in Level 2
and 80 in Level 3) across the province.

CDDHFM, in partnership with Bow Valley College, utilized $293,033 in grant funding provided by
the department in 2024-25 to enhance the certification levels of 29 Family Day Home (FDH)
educators. This funding supported post-secondary training, with 17 educators completing
certificate-level programs and 12 completing diploma programs.

With an investment of $375,000 in 2024-25, the department is supporting the YNAB to offer a
work-integrated learning pilot for ECEs at YMCA child care centers across Edmonton and the
underserved regions of Grande Prairie, Wood Buffalo, Lethbridge and Medicine Hat. In
collaboration with MacEwan University, the pilot is supporting 38 Level 1 ECEs to increase their
certification to Level 2 in one year while they continue to work in child care.

Professional Development

Professional development opportunities support ECEs to achieve higher levels of certification and
career advancement while also enhancing their effectiveness as providers of care and education.
The Government of Alberta provides up to $4,387.50 per ECE per fiscal year for professional
development and release time to certified ECEs in the province. This funding assists with approved
post-secondary tuition, textbooks, conferences and workshops for eligible ECEs. Release time
funding allows certified ECEs to be paid while they pursue post-secondary education or attend
approved professional development workshops or conferences. In 2024-25, 5,400 ECEs accessed
funding for professional development, totaling $19.7 million.

The department also continued the implementation of the evidence-based Flight: Alberta’s Early
Learning and Care Curriculum Framework training. Flight is a free online professional learning
opportunity, available in English and French, for ECEs and program administrators in licensed and
approved child care programs in Alberta. MacEwan University delivered Flight training to a total of
1,051 learners in 2024-25.

Pedagogical Partner Support is a department-sponsored initiative to facilitate the implementation
of the Flight curriculum. Pedagogical Partners are ECE leaders that work alongside Flight
participants to help them apply theoretical knowledge to their child care practice. 225 programs
were supported and 1,129 ECEs participated in Pedagogical Partner Support in 2024-25. The
program expanded to include all program staff, resulting in a significant increase in participation in
partnerships. Additionally, 2,516 ECEs completed an introductory, intermediate or leadership
learning series on the implementation of the Flight curriculum framework in 2024-25.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                      69
Results Analysis



In 2024-25, the department supported various other targeted initiatives aimed at enhancing child
care quality through professional development, training and resources for ECEs. Under these
initiatives, approximately 1,136 ECEs accessed child and infant mental health and mental health
first aid training and 445 ECEs accessed theory-to-practice and Brain Story Certification training.
Additionally, 246 programs were supported to provide developmental screening training.

Wage Top-ups and Benefits

The long-standing wage top-up program supports the child care workforce by providing a wage
enhancement for all eligible front-line certified ECEs in licensed child care programs. Wage top-ups
are available for all paid time worked by ECEs providing child care or supervision of children
during operational hours, up to a maximum of 181 hours per month.

The wage top-up program provides progressive compensation to ECEs in licensed child care
programs based on their level of certification: $2.64 per hour for Level 1, $5.05 per hour for Level 2
and $8.62 per hour for Level 3. These top-ups ensure a consistent base salary for all certified ECEs.

In 2024-25, approximately $242.58 million, including $108.5 million in CACWELCC funding and
$134.1 million in provincial funding, was provided to certified ECEs in wage top-ups.

The department also invested $19.84 million, including $16.27 million in CACWELCC funding and
$3.57 million in provincial funding, to licensed child care operators to offset the increased costs of
mandatory employer contributions resulting from increased payroll expenditures associated with
wage top-ups for ECEs.

Early Childhood Educator Awards

The Minister’s Awards of Excellence in Child Development were reinstated in 2024 to recognize the
important work done by certified ECEs and providers in licensed child care programs. ECEs and
child care providers show resilience and dedication to creating safe, inclusive and high-quality child
care that makes life better for children, families and communities. Nominating providers recognizes
excellence in the child care field and celebrates the outstanding work that educators and providers
deliver across Alberta.

A virtual award ceremony was held on October 16, 2024, where Minister Matt Jones presented nine
awards across categories for Individuals, Teams and Programs. 55 submissions were reviewed by a
selection committee, including 25 submissions for Individuals, 12 for Teams and 18 for Programs.
Of these submissions, three individuals, three teams and three programs across the province were
recognized for their outstanding contributions.




70                                                        Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis



    Jobs, Economy and Trade: Performance Measure 4.a:
    Percentage change in the number of licensed child care spaces


                         Prior Years’ Results
                                                                       2024-25         2024-25
  2020-21           2021-22            2022-23      2023-24             Target          Actual


  4%                6%                 8%           9%               9%              10%

This measure indicates whether the province is meeting supply and demand pressures for child
care and is directly related to population growth, policy changes and any government commitments
to expanding child care programs.

In 2024-25, the number of licensed child care spaces increased by ten per cent, relative to the
previous year, increasing one percentage point and exceeding the target of nine per cent. These
results are in alignment with the targets set out in the CACWELCC agreement and action plan.

This increase is influenced by operators meeting increased demand for child care throughout the
province as out-of-pocket costs to parents continue to decrease through implementation of the
Canada Alberta Early Learning Child Care Agreement. Space creation efforts implemented by the
provincial government have also contributed to this increase and the result may be further
influenced by population trends (including growth and interprovincial migration), labour market
participation and personal choice.

There are several factors that continue to impact space creation, such as construction delays, delays
in applicants collecting approval and collateral and the availability of certified Early Childhood
Educators (ECEs) to staff new or expanded facilities.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                   71
Results Analysis




Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology
No single measure or indicator can fully represent an outcome in the ministry annual report. The
suite of performance measures and indicators reported provide a better picture of overall progress
toward achieving the ministry’s outcomes.

Performance measures provide information on the ministry’s progress toward achieving the
outcomes and key strategies in the business plan. Results of performance measures can be
attributed to the work of the ministry. Targets for the performance measures are intended to be
aggressive but realistic. While the specific methodologies vary, all targets are set taking into
consideration historical results and current environmental factors.

Performance indicators capture far-reaching outcomes that the ministry’s programs and initiatives
intend to influence over the long-term. These indicators are also influenced by many factors outside
the ministry’s control. Performance indicators reflect what the ministry intends to influence, as well
as the larger societal context within which the ministry operates.

Jobs, Economy and Trade: Performance Measure 1.a:
   Net investment in Alberta film and television productions for every $1 of Alberta Film
   and Television Tax Credits ($ dollars)

This measure demonstrates the efficacy of Alberta’s Film and Television Tax Credit program and
Alberta’s ability to attract medium to large production firms. It measures corresponding
investments by film and television productions for every dollar of tax credit issued in 2024-25, in
alignment with government’s commitment to grow cultural industries.

Data for this performance measure is collected directly from applicants via the department’s client
relations management database, which has security and privacy protocols in place. As part of the
application and approval processes, successful applicants must provide audited financials to
validate Alberta expenditures prior to tax credit issuance. Department staff review this information
for accuracy and base the tax credit amount on its review findings and validation. The amount of
expenditures from approved productions spent in Alberta in contrast to the tax credit issued are
measured and reported.

                             Total value of Alberta investment (expenditures) expected from
       Net Investment =      productions with approved tax credits
                             Total value of tax credits approved during the year




72                                                       Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis



Jobs, Economy and Trade: Performance Indicator 1.b:
   Year-over-year change in Alberta’s economic activity (per cent)

Treasury Board and Finance’s (TBF’s) Alberta Activity Index (AAX) is a weighted average of nine
monthly indicators, each measuring an important aspect of macroeconomic activity:
    •   Employment
    •   Average weekly earnings
    •   Retail trade
    •   Wholesale trade
    •   Manufacturing shipments
    •   New truck sales
    •   Housing starts
    •   Rigs drilling
    •   Oil production

TBF collects the data and weights the variables. The department acquires the data from TBF and
exports it to undertake a year-over-year percentage calculation. Historical results are recalculated
each time the measure is presented to capture revisions to the underlying data.

                        AAX current year monthly average − AAX prior year monthly average
        Percentage =
                                          AAX prior year monthly average


Results are presented as a year-over-year percentage change in the 12-month average of the AAX
up to and including October (i.e., November to October). The AAX data table can be accessed at:
https://open.alberta.ca/dataset/alberta-activity-index-data-tables.

Jobs, Economy and Trade: Performance Indicator 1.c: Value of Alberta’s non-residential
   capital investment ($ million).

Capital investment is a sign of a growing, healthy economy. As companies expand, they purchase
property, build facilities and buy equipment. This contributes to Alberta’s GDP and improves
Alberta’s long-term economic performance.

Statistics Canada’s Capital and Repair Expenditures Survey: Actual, Preliminary Actual and
Intentions (CAPEX) collects information from all industries once a year about their actual past
years’ capital investments, as well as their intended investments for the current year. On occasion,
where economic changes justify the need, data on the revised intentions are also collected for the
current year.

The survey is administered as part of the Integrated Business Statistics Program. The target
population comprises all business and government entities operating in Canada according to the
North American Industry Classification System 2012 during the reference year. Outlays for used
Canadian assets are excluded since they constitute a transfer of assets within Canada and have no
effect on the aggregates of our domestic inventory. Assets imported from outside Canada are
included as they increase our domestic inventory.




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                   73
Results Analysis



The investment figure includes capital expenditures, which comprises construction and machinery
and equipment. It excludes repair expenditures on both construction and machinery and
equipment. Capital expenditures include the cost of procuring, constructing and installing new
durable plant and machinery and equipment, whether for replacement of worn or obsolete assets,
as additions to existing assets or for lease or rent to others and all other capitalized costs.

For more information on the methodology of the Capital and Repair Expenditures Survey, please
see Guide to the Annual Capital Expenditures Survey: Actual, Preliminary Estimate and Intentions
(CAPEX), Statistics Canada (2018):
https://www23.statcan.gc.ca/imdb/p2SV.pl?Function=getSurvey&SDDS=2803

Jobs, Economy and Trade: Performance Measure 2.a:
   Outcomes for Training for Work clients

The results for this measure are obtained through the Work Outcomes Reporting Project Survey.
This project relies on administrative data from MOBIUS, a database managed internally by the
Department of Seniors, Community and Social Services, to identify the survey population. An
independent consultant is contracted to contact former program participants three months after
they have left a Training for Work program delivered by the department. The Work Outcomes
Reporting Project uses a census approach for the department’s clients who have attended Training
for Work programs, meaning all clients who took these programs will be contacted for inclusion in
the survey, which is completed by phone or online. The same question wording is used for both the
phone and the online questionnaires. Both phone and online responses are captured in the result
calculation. The results for this measure are calculated based on the clients who have participated
in the department’s Training for Work programs and left their program between September 1,
2023 and August 31, 2024. The number of Training for Work participants who identified as
employed, self-employed or in school/training is determined using the following question: “What is
your current main activity? Are you Employed, Self-employed, In School/Training, Unemployed,
Retired?” Responses that indicate that the participant is employed, self-employed or in
school/training are used to determine the performance measure result.

Post-survey weighting (population and non-response) are employed to ensure the
representativeness of the results. Non-responders are filtered out of the final dataset. The
percentage is obtained by dividing the weighted sum of respondents employed, self-employed or in
further education/training for all programs divided by the weighted sum of all respondents.

Calculation (weighted frequencies):

                             ∑(employed + self employed + in school/training)
              Percentage =                                                    × 100
                                            ∑(all responses)


*Note that the calculation does not include the “don’t know” or “no response” categories.




74                                                      Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                         Results Analysis



Jobs, Economy and Trade: Performance Indicator 3.a:
   Occupational Health and Safety

Occupational Health and Safety field activities

The Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) program undertakes a number of field activities based
on proactive and reactive work to take a balanced approach to regulatory enforcement and help
workplaces become more self-reliant.

The Data and Statistics Hub (DASH) tracks all data related to OHS work processes. For this
performance measure, a report is created from DASH that identifies all in-scope OHS field activities.

Types of OHS field activities:

    •   Inspection: An assessment of a work site and/or associated documentation for compliance
        with the Occupational Health and Safety Act, Regulation and Code.
    •   Re-inspection: A follow up assessment of a work site for compliance with the Occupational
        Health and Safety Act, Regulation and Code.
    •   Investigation: An investigation is conducted on any workplace incident that is defined as
        ‘reportable’ under the Occupational Health and Safety Act section 40(1) prior to December 1,
        2021 and the Occupational Health and Safety Act Section 33(1) after December 1, 2021.
    •   Continuation of Investigation: This refers to an investigation that has commenced and is still
        underway.
    •   Presentation: An activity that is used when an officer completes a presentation to a work
        site party/parties.
    •   Meeting: An in-person, video or telephone conversation with a regulated party for the
        purpose of education regarding the Occupational Health and Safety Act, Regulation and Code
        or as an escalation from previous compliance activities.

Publications Delivered: An activity that is used when the officer provides Government of Alberta
authored documents to the work site party while on site.

Lost-time claim rate and disabling injury rate

The lost-time claim and disabling injury rates represent the probability, or risk, of injury or disease
to a worker during a period of one year’s work. The disabling injury rate is similar to the lost-time
claim rate, although it covers a broader range of injuries, including those that are less severe in
nature (do not require time away from work). The measures indicate the number of lost-time
claims or disabling injuries per 100 person-years worked to indicate increases or decreases in this
risk. One person-year is equivalent to one full-time worker working for one year or 2,000 hours
worked.

The Workers’ Compensation Board (WCB) records a lost-time claim or disabling injury claim when
a worker, their physician or employer submits an injury report form. A claim is considered a
lost-time claim when the worker is on compensation for one or more days subsequent to the day of
injury. A claim is considered a disabling injury claim when the worker is on compensation for one
or more days subsequent to the day of injury or performs modified work duties. The WCB collects
this information, calculates the estimated person-years worked and provides the data files to the
department for analysis. The lost-time claim and disabling injury rates are reported by calendar
year and are calculated by dividing the number of lost-time claims or disabling injury claims by the
number of estimated person-years worked. The lost-time claim and disabling injury rates represent
the probability, or risk, of injury or disease to a worker during a period of one year’s work. The
disabling injury rate is similar to the lost-time claim rate, although it covers a broader range of


Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                     75
Results Analysis



injuries, including those that are less severe in nature (do not require time away from work). The
measures indicate the number of lost-time claims or disabling injuries per 100 person-years
worked to indicate increases or decreases in this risk. One person-year is equivalent to one
full-time worker working for one year or 2,000 hours worked.

                                              Number of lost-time claims
                     Lost-time Claim Rate=                               ×100
                                               Estimated person-years


                                              Number of disabling injuries
                    Disabling Injury Rate =                                × 100
                                                Estimated person-years


Each year, new data are sent to the department that include the most recent injury data for the last
five years. The previous four years of results are re-calculated with the updated data provided by
the WCB. Re-calculating historical results provides the reader with the most accurate and
up-to-date injury information. There is no change in how the results are calculated.

Jobs, Economy and Trade: Performance Measure 3.b:
   Collective Bargaining cases with the assistance of a ministry-appointed mediator

The measure provides an indication of the effectiveness of mediation in assisting parties to reach a
collective bargaining agreement without a work stoppage taking place.

The data used to determine the “percentage of collective bargaining agreements reached with the
assistance of a ministry-appointed mediator that were settled without a work stoppage” (rate) is
internally produced and validated. The data is housed in the Mediation Services Labour Relations
Resolution Information database. Mediation Services runs a report called “MS Percentage of Alberta
Mediation Appointments Resolved Without Work Stoppage”, which provides historical and current
fiscal year to date information on the rate.

                            Number of mediations settled without a work stoppage
             Percentage =                                                        × 100
                                    Total number of mediations settled

Jobs, Economy and Trade: Performance Measure 3.c:
   Alberta Labour Relations Board decisions rendered within 90 calendar days

This performance measure reflects the Alberta Labour Relations Board’s commitment to issue
decisions in a timely fashion.

The Alberta Labour Relations Board Customer Relationship Management (CRM) system tracks all
data related to hearings and decision timelines. For this performance measure, a report is created
from the CRM system that identifies those decisions that have met the reporting period
requirements and the duration of the time from the commitment date (usually the date of the last
completed hearing day related to the matter(s) applicable to the decision) to the date that the
decision was rendered (written decision was issued). Sometimes the commitment date may differ
from the hearing date if further submissions are accepted by the presiding Chair or Vice Chair at a
later time.




76                                                       Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                                  Results Analysis



Using the report, the percentage of decisions completed within 90 days or less is calculated.
Hearings are generally included in the calculation for the year in which the decision was rendered
(the written decision is issued). However, in the event that a decision is reserved (hearing is
completed) in one fiscal year but rendered (the written decision is issued) in a subsequent fiscal
year, the case will be included in either the fiscal year in which the 90-day threshold occurs, or the
fiscal year in which the decision is rendered, whichever date occurs first.

The Board’s new CRM went live in November 2019 following rigorous testing and development of
new procedures. Employment Standards appeals were integrated into the CRM system in
September 2020. Occupational Health and Safety appeals were integrated into the CRM system in
March 2022.
                                                  𝐃𝐃𝐃𝐃𝐃𝐃𝐃𝐃𝐃𝐃𝐃𝐃𝐃𝐃𝐃𝐃𝐃𝐃 𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫 𝐰𝐰𝐰𝐰𝐰𝐰𝐰𝐰𝐰𝐰𝐰𝐰 𝟗𝟗𝟗𝟗 𝐝𝐝𝐝𝐝𝐝𝐝𝐝𝐝 𝐨𝐨𝐨𝐨 𝐥𝐥𝐥𝐥𝐥𝐥𝐥𝐥
                𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏𝐏 𝐑𝐑𝐑𝐑𝐑𝐑𝐑𝐑 =                                                                                × 𝟏𝟏𝟏𝟏𝟏𝟏
                                                      𝐓𝐓𝐓𝐓𝐓𝐓𝐓𝐓𝐓𝐓 𝐧𝐧𝐧𝐧𝐧𝐧𝐧𝐧𝐧𝐧𝐧𝐧 𝐨𝐨𝐨𝐨 𝐝𝐝𝐝𝐝𝐝𝐝𝐝𝐝𝐝𝐝𝐝𝐝𝐝𝐝𝐝𝐝𝐝𝐝 𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫𝐫

Jobs, Economy and Trade: Performance Measure 4.a:
   Percentage change in the number of licensed child care spaces

This performance measure describes the percentage change in the number of licensed child care
spaces over time. Licensed child care spaces are the maximum number of children a child care
program can accommodate at one time. Child care programs include: daycare programs, preschool
programs, group family programs, innovative programs, out-of-school care programs and approved
family day homes (through family day home agencies).

This measure indicates whether the province is meeting supply and demand pressures for child
care and is directly related to population growth, policy changes and any government commitments
to expanding child care programs.

The number of spaces within a child care program is the total net floor area divided by the number
of required square meters per child. Daycare programs require three square meters for each child,
while out-of-school and pre-school programs require 2.5 square meters per child.

The percentage increase in licensed child care spaces is calculated by using the difference in the
available spaces between March of the previous year and March in the current year. March data is
used in these calculations as it represents the end of the fiscal year. This number is then divided by
the number of spaces in March of the previous year and expressed in percentage as indicated by the
following formula:

                    Spaces in March of the current year − Spaces in March of previous year
   Percentage =                                                                            × 100
                                        Spaces in March of previous year




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024-2025                                                                                              77
Financial Information




      Financial Information

      Year Ended March 31, 2025

      Table of Contents

      Reporting Entity and Method of Consolidation

      Ministry Financial Highlights

      Statement of Revenues and Expenses (unaudited)

      Revenue and Expense Highlights

      Breakdown of Revenues (unaudited)

      Expenses - Directly Incurred Detailed by Object (unaudited)

      Supplemental Financial Information

      Tangible Capital Assets (unaudited)

      Other Financial Information

      Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited)


                                                                                        Digitally signed by
     Christopher
     [Original signed by]                                            [Original signed by]
                        Digitally signed by Christopher McPherson


                                                                     Andre.Rivest Date: 2025.05.23
                        DN: cn=Christopher McPherson,
                        o=Government of Alberta, ou=Jobs, Economy,                    Andre.Rivest
                        Trade and Immigration,

     McPherson
     Chris McPherson
                        email=christopher.mcpherson@gov.ab.ca,
                        c=CA
                        Date: 2025.05.23 16:44:00 -06'00'            Andre Rivest       16:25:23 -06'00'


     Deputy
     Deputy Minister
            Minister                                                 Assistant
                                                                     AssistantDeputy
                                                                               DeputyMinister,
                                                                                      Minister,Financial
                                                                                                FinancialServices
                                                                                                          Servicesand SFO
                                                                                                                    and SFO




78                                                                                Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                      Financial Information


Reporting Entity and Method of Consolidation




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                    79
Financial Information




80                      Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                      Financial Information




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                    81
Financial Information




82                      Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                      Financial Information




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                    83
Financial Information




84                      Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                      Financial Information




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                    85
Financial Information




86                      Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                      Financial Information




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                    87
Financial Information




88                      Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                        Other Financial Information




                                Workers’ Compensation Board – Alberta

                         Financial Statements and Notes
                                For the Year Ended December 31, 2024




                                      WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                  - 38 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                             89
Other Financial Information




       Table of contents

       Financial Statements
           Statement of Financial Position                                                                 45
           Statement of Financial Performance and Comprehensive Income                                     46
           Statement of Changes in Fund Balance                                                            47
           Statement of Cash Flows                                                                         48


       Notes to the Financial Statements
           1. Reporting Entity                                                                             49
           2. Material Accounting Policies                                                                 49
           3. Accounting Policy Changes                                                                    51
           4. Fund Management                                                                              52
           5. Investments                                                                                  53
           6. Investment Income and Expense                                                                56
           7. Investment Risk Management                                                                   57
           8. Property, Plant and Equipment                                                                60
           9. Intangible Assets                                                                            62
           10. Leases                                                                                      63
           11. Employee Benefits                                                                           65
           12. Insurance Contracts                                                                         69
           13. Insurance Revenue and Expenses                                                              77
           14. Insurance Risk and Risk Management                                                          81
           15. Insurance Finance Income and Expense                                                        85
           16. Administration and Other Expense                                                            86
           17. Related Party Transactions                                                                  87
           18. Contingencies and Indemnification                                                           89
           19. Supplemental Information                                                                    90




                                         WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                     - 39 -




90                                                                                   Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                                            Other Financial Information




       Responsibility for Financial Reporting
       The financial statements of the Workers' Compensation Board – Alberta were prepared by management, which is
       responsible for the integrity and fairness of the data presented, including significant accounting judgements and
       estimates. This responsibility includes selecting appropriate accounting principles consistent with IFRS Accounting
       Standards.
       In discharging its responsibility for the integrity and fairness of the financial statements, management maintains the
       necessary internal controls designed to provide reasonable assurance that relevant and reliable financial information is
       produced and that assets are properly safeguarded. The effectiveness of controls over financial reporting was assessed
       and found to provide reasonable assurance that internal controls at December 31, 2024 operated effectively with no
       material weaknesses in the design or operation of the controls.
       The Board of Directors is responsible for overseeing management in the performance of financial reporting
       responsibilities and has approved the financial statements included in the annual report.
       The Board of Directors is assisted in its responsibilities by its Audit Committee. This committee reviews and recommends
       approval of the financial statements and meets periodically with management, internal and external auditors, and
       actuaries concerning internal controls and all other matters relating to financial reporting.
       Eckler Ltd. has been appointed as the independent consulting actuary to the WCB. Their role is to complete an
       independent actuarial valuation of the insurance liabilities included in the financial statements of the WCB and to report
       thereon in accordance with accepted actuarial practice.
       The Office of the Auditor General, the independent auditor of the WCB, has performed an independent audit of the
       financial statements of the WCB in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards. The Independent
       Auditor’s Report outlines the scope of this independent audit and the opinion expressed.




       Dr. Ray Block                                Trevor Alexander                                     Ron J. Helmhold, FCPA, FCA
       Chair, Board of Directors                    President and Chief Executive Officer                Chief Financial Officer
       Workers’ Compensation Board – Alberta        Workers’ Compensation Board – Alberta                Workers’ Compensation Board – Alberta




                                               WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                           - 40 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                                 91
Other Financial Information




                     Independent Auditor’s Report


                     To the Board of Directors of the Workers’ Compensation Board — Alberta


                     Report on the Financial Statements

                     Opinion
                     I have audited the financial statements of the Workers’ Compensation Board — Alberta (the Board),
                     which comprise the statement of financial position as at December 31, 2024, and the statements of
                     financial performance and comprehensive income, changes in fund balance, and cash flows for the
                     year then ended, and notes to the financial statements, including material accounting policy
                     information.

                     In my opinion, the accompanying financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the
                     financial position of the Board as at December 31, 2024, and its financial performance, and its cash
                     flows for the year then ended in accordance with IFRS Accounting Standards.

                     Basis for opinion
                     I conducted my audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards. My
                     responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor's Responsibilities for the
                     Audit of the Financial Statements section of my report. I am independent of the Board in accordance
                     with the ethical requirements that are relevant to my audit of the financial statements in Canada,
                     and I have fulfilled my other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements. I believe
                     that the audit evidence I have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my
                     opinion.

                     Other information
                     Management is responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the
                     information included in the Workers’ Compensation Board — Alberta 2024 Annual Report, but does
                     not include the financial statements and my auditor’s report thereon.

                     My opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and I do not express
                     any form of assurance conclusion thereon.

                     In connection with my audit of the financial statements, my responsibility is to read the other
                     information identified above and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially
                     inconsistent with the financial statements or my knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise
                     appears to be materially misstated.

                     If, based on the work I have performed on this other information, I conclude that there is a material
                     misstatement of this other information, I am required to report that fact. I have nothing to report in
                     this regard.



             Classification: Public




                                             WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                         - 41 -




92                                                                                      Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                                   Other Financial Information




                         Responsibilities of management and those charged with governance for the financial
                         statements
                         Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial
                         statements in accordance with IFRS Accounting Standards, and for such internal control as
                         management determines is necessary to enable the preparation of the financial statements
                         that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.

                         In preparing the financial statements, management is responsible for assessing the Board’s
                         ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going
                         concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless an intention exists to liquidate
                         or to cease operations, or there is no realistic alternative but to do so.

                         Those charged with governance are responsible for overseeing the Board’s financial reporting
                         process.

                         Auditor's responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements
                         My objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a
                         whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an
                         auditor's report that includes my opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance,
                         but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with Canadian generally
                         accepted auditing standards will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
                         Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in
                         the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users
                         taken on the basis of these financial statements.

                         As part of an audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards, I
                         exercise professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit. I
                         also:
                         • Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether
                             due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and
                             obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion.
                             The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for
                             one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions,
                             misrepresentations, or the override of internal control.
                         • Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit
                             procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of
                             expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Board’s internal control.
                         • Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of
                             accounting estimates and related disclosures made by management.
                         • Conclude on the appropriateness of management’s use of the going concern basis of
                             accounting and, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty
                             exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Board’s ability
                             to continue as a going concern. If I conclude that a material uncertainty exists, I am
                             required to draw attention in my auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the
                             financial statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify my opinion. My
                             conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of my auditor’s
                             report. However, future events or conditions may cause the Board to cease to continue as
                             a going concern.




             Classification: Public




                                              WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                          - 42 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                        93
Other Financial Information




                         •   Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements,
                             including the disclosures, and whether the financial statements represent the underlying
                             transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation.

                         I communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the
                         planned scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant
                         deficiencies in internal control that I identify during my audit.




                         [Original signed by W. Doug Wylie FCPA, FCMA, ICD.D]
                         Auditor General

                         April 29, 2025
                         Edmonton, Alberta




             Classification: Public




                                              WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                          - 43 -




94                                                                                       Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                              Other Financial Information




       Actuarial statement of opinion
       on the valuation of the insurance liabilities as at December 31, 2024 of the Workers’ Compensation Board – Alberta
       for its financial statements prepared in accordance with IFRS Accounting Standards
       I have valued the insurance liabilities of the Workers’ Compensation Board – Alberta for its financial statements
       prepared in accordance with IFRS Accounting Standards for the year ending December 31, 2024.
       In my opinion, the insurance liabilities of $14,608.2 million make appropriate provision for the liabilities for incurred
       claims and the liabilities for remaining coverage. The liabilities for incurred claims provide for future payments for short-
       term disability, re-employment services, long-term disability, survivor and health care benefits with respect to claims
       which occurred on or before the valuation date, and for all occupational disease claims expected to arise after the
       valuation date as a result of exposures incurred in the workplace on or before the valuation date in respect of
       occupational diseases with a long latency period that are recognized by the WCB, as well as for future claims
       management costs, but do not include a provision for benefits and payments that are on a self-insured basis.
       The data on which the valuation is based were provided by the WCB; I applied such checks of reasonableness of the
       data that I considered appropriate, and have concluded that the data are sufficiently reliable to permit a realistic
       valuation of the liabilities and that the data are consistent with WCB’s financial statements. In my opinion, the data on
       which the valuation is based are sufficient and reliable for the purpose of the valuation.
       The nominal discount rate assumption for computing the liabilities is consistent with the market data available as at
       December 31, 2024, reflecting the liquid risk-free rate of return and the liquidity characteristics associated with WCB
       benefits. The inflation assumption is aligned with the inflation rates implied by the market interest rates used for
       discounting the cash flows.
       Other assumptions and methods employed in the valuation were consistent with those used in the previous valuation,
       after taking account of changes in claim patterns. Projections of future claim payments and awards have been made
       using factors developed from the WCB’s claims experience, mortality, and other assumptions. The increase of $1,034.1
       million in the insurance liabilities, from $13,574.1 million at the end of 2023 to $14,608.2 million as at December 31,
       2024, considers an increase of $172.2 million resulting from updates of the nominal discount rate and inflation
       assumptions. Other changes made to the valuation assumptions reduced the liabilities for incurred claims by $128.8
       million: reductions of $389.0 million for mortality assumptions, $65.6 million for home maintenance and housekeeping
       allowances, and $54.1 million for expected wage growth, partly compensated by an increase of $379.9 million for short-
       term wage loss and re-employment services assumptions. In my opinion, the methods and the assumptions employed
       in the valuation are appropriate for the purpose of the valuation.
       Details of the data, actuarial assumptions, valuation methods and results are set out in my actuarial report as at the
       valuation date, of which this statement of opinion forms part.
       The valuation is based on the provisions of the Workers’ Compensation Act of Alberta and on the WCB's policies and
       administrative practices in effect at the time of the valuation.
       In my opinion, the amount of the insurance liabilities for IFRS Accounting Standards financial statements makes
       appropriate provision for all personal injury compensation obligations given WCB’s accounting, and the financial
       statements fairly represent the results of the valuation. This report has been prepared, and my opinions given, in
       accordance with accepted actuarial practice in Canada.




       Richard Larouche, FSA, FCIA
       Actuary, Eckler Ltd.
       April 28, 2025



                                            WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                        - 44 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                   95
Other Financial Information




       Workers’ Compensation Board – Alberta
       Statement of Financial Position
       As at December 31


       ($ thousands)                                                           Notes                  2024                2023

       A SSE T S
          Cash and cash equivalents                                             19(a)      $                  265,807 $          373,378
          Receivables and other assets                                                                        48,795            32,591
          Investments                                                             5                       13,886,795        12,492,023
          Property, plant and equipment                                           8                           72,190            69,627
          Intangible assets                                                       9                           25,801            36,125
          Pension plan assets                                                    11                                -            34,650
                                                                                           $              14,299,388 $      13,038,394

       LIABILITIES
          Trade and other liabilities                                         10,19(b)     $                  91,788 $          62,635
          Safety rebates                                                       19(c)                         104,236            85,996
          Employee benefits                                                      11                           51,588            45,563
          Insurance liabilities                                                  12                       14,608,233        13,574,058
                                                                                           $              14,855,845 $      13,768,252

       FU ND B A L ANC E                                                                                     (556,457)           (729,858)

                                                                                           $              14,299,388 $      13,038,394


       Contingencies and Indemnification                                         18

       Approved by the Board of Directors on April 29, 2025.




       Dr. Ray Block                                                       Trevor Alexander
       Chair, Board of Directors                                           President and Chief Executive Officer
       Workers’ Compensation Board- Alberta                                Workers’ Compensation Board - Alberta




       The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.




                                                    WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                - 45 -




96                                                                                              Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                                                              Other Financial Information




       Workers’ Compensation Board – Alberta
       Statement of Financial Performance and Comprehensive Income
       Year ended December 31
       ($ thousands)                                                                                  Notes            2024                     2023

       I NSUR A NC E M ANAG EM ENT
          I n s u r a n c e re v e n u e
              Premiums for insurance coverage                                                           13      $         1,539,382       $      1,353,301
          I nsuranc e e x pe nse
             Cost of current year claims                                                                13               (1,744,491)             (1,596,477)
             Remeasurement of insurance liabilities (excluding discount rate changes)                   13                 (179,588)               (938,081)
             Reversal of onerous contracts                                                              12                   16,900                  26,100
                                                                                                                         (1,907,179)             (2,508,458)
       I N S U R A N C E M A N A G E M E N T R E S UL T                                                                    (367,797)             (1,155,157)


       FI N A NC I A L M A N A G E M E N T
           I nv e stm e nt i nc om e a nd e x pe n se
             Investment income                                                                           6                1,599,972              1,021,549
             Investment management expense                                                               6                  (73,897)               (82,288)
                                                                                                                          1,526,075                939,261
          I nsuranc e f i nanc e i nc om e and e x pe nse
             Interest on insurance liabilities                                                          15                    (671,300)           (532,400)
             Effect of inflation and discount rate changes on liabilities                               13                    (172,200)            196,200
                                                                                                                              (843,500)           (336,200)
       FI N A NC I A L M A N A G E M E N T R E SU L T                                                                          682,575             603,061


       A D M I N I S T R A T I ON A ND OT H E R E X P E N S E
          Corporate administration                                                                      16                    (105,600)            (95,134)
          Injury reduction                                                                             19(d)                     4,370                 5,403
          Other expenses                                                                                                          (328)                1,187
       A D M I N I S T R A T I ON A ND OT H E R E X P E N S E - N E T                                                         (101,558)            (88,544)

       N E T I N C OM E                                                                                                       213,220             (640,640)


       OT H E R C OM P R E H E N S I V E I NC OM E
         I te m s that wi l l no t b e re c l a ssi f i e d to ne t i nc o m e
          Remeasurement of employee benefits                                                            11                     (39,819)            (28,167)

       T O T A L C OM P R E H E N S I V E I N C O M E                                                           $             173,401     $       (668,807)


       The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.




                                                            WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                        - 46 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                                                   97
Other Financial Information




       Workers’ Compensation Board – Alberta

       Statement of Changes in Fund Balance
       Year ended December 31
          ($ thousands)                                                                                            202 4                2023


       Fund B a l a nc e , be g i nni ng of y e a r                                                           $         (729,858)   $     (61,051)
          Net Income                                                                                                    213,220          (640,640)
         Other comprehensive income                                                                                     (39,819)          (28,167)
       Fund B a l a nc e , e nd of y e a r                                                                    $         (556,457)   $    (729,858)


       The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.




                                                      WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                  - 47 -




98                                                                                                Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                                                      Other Financial Information




       Workers’ Compensation Board – Alberta
       Statement of Cash Flows
       Year ended December 31


       ($ thousands)                                                                                           2024                    2023


       OPERATING ACTIVITIES
         Cash inflows (outflows) related to insurance management
             Premiums for insurance coverage                                                           $         1,536,957        $      1,369,085
             Injury reduction recovery from premiums                                                                   78,560                 75,645
             Benefits to claimants and/or third parties on their behalf                                          (1,487,040)            (1,443,677)
             Administrative and other goods and services                                                           (312,006)              (283,358)
             Statutory funding commitments for injury reduction programs                                               (37,954)            (69,369)
                                                                                                                      (221,483)           (351,674)


       INVESTING ACTIVITIES
         Cash inflows (outflows) related to investment assets
             Interest income received                                                                                  12,452                 10,410
             Investment management expenses                                                                            (1,148)             (1,310)
             Cash transfers from (to) investments                                                                     120,000             550,000
                                                                                                                      131,304             559,100


          Cash inflows (outflows) related to operating assets
             Purchase of property, plant and equipment                                                                  (9,710)               (9,801)
             Purchase of computer software                                                                              (4,592)               (7,643)
                                                                                                                      117,002             541,656


       FINANCING ACTIVITIES
          Cash inflows (outflows) related to financing
            Payments on lease and other financing                                                                       (3,090)               (3,025)

          Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents                                                        (107,571)           186,957
             Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year                                                             373,378             186,421


       CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS, END OF YEAR                                                          $              265,807     $       373,378



       The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.




                                                    WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                - 48 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                                           99
Other Financial Information




       Notes to the Financial Statements
       For the year ended December 31, 2024 with comparatives for the year ended December 31, 2023
       (thousands of dollars unless stated otherwise).

       1. REPORTING ENTITY
           The Workers’ Compensation Board – Alberta (WCB) is a provincial board created by legislation in 1918. As a
           statutory corporation, WCB administers the workers’ compensation system for the province of Alberta under the
           authority of the Workers’ Compensation Act (the Act). WCB’s corporate head office is located at 9925 107 Street
           NW, Edmonton, Alberta T5K 1G4, with operations exclusively within the province of Alberta. As a statutory
           corporation, WCB is exempt from income tax. WCB’s legislated mandate is to provide disability benefits to workers
           who sustain workplace injuries or disease in the course of employment.

       2. MATERIAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
           The following accounting policies have been applied in the preparation of the financial statements for all years
           presented, unless otherwise indicated.

           GENERAL ACCOUNTING POLICY
           Basis of preparation
           These financial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRS Accounting Standards as at and applicable
           on December 31, 2024, and on a cost or amortized cost basis except for investments reported at fair value and
           employee benefit and insurance liabilities, which are actuarially determined. The principal accounting policies
           applied in the preparation of the financial statements are set out below.
           Financial statement presentation
           All financial information presented is rounded to the nearest thousand, unless otherwise stated.
           WCB presents its Statement of Financial Position in order of liquidity.
           The Statement of Financial Performance and Comprehensive Income reports results arising from WCB’s primary
           activities: core business operations including risk underwriting, premium assessment and collection, benefit
           processing, injury treatment and vocational rehabilitation, and financial management including investment
           management and insurance liability valuation. Administration and other expense is presented in the Statement of
           Financial Performance and Comprehensive Income by function. Injury reduction is presented net of premium
           recovery. Other comprehensive income consists of net changes in remeasurement of post-employment defined
           benefit plan results, which is an item that will not be subsequently reclassified to income or expense.
           Critical judgements and accounting estimates
           Management incorporates critical judgements and accounting estimates in developing and applying accounting
           policies for recognition and measurement. Such judgements and estimates, which reflect best information at a
           point in time, affect the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities and
           the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods presented. Critical judgements
           include the use of fair value measurement of investment assets, establishing the contract boundary for insurance
           contracts, concluding that the risk adjustment for insurance liabilities is zero, the selection of appropriate
           methodologies, assumptions and data inputs for measurement of insurance contract assets and liabilities and for
           employee benefit assets and liabilities.
           The imposition of tariffs by the United States on certain Canadian goods, first announced on February 1, 2025, and
           the subsequent retaliatory measures by Canada have introduced significant economic uncertainty. The specifics




                                            WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                        - 49 -




100                                                                                     Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                               Other Financial Information




           regarding the impacted goods, tariff amounts, and effective dates have fluctuated since then, further complicating
           the economic landscape. As the developments on tariffs arose subsequent to year-end, the potential impacts did
           not have any significant impact on WCB’s estimates at December 31, 2024, but may impact future estimates.
           Some accounting measurements require management’s best estimates for those transactions for which sufficient
           information may not be available to record a precise amount. Actual results in subsequent periods could differ from
           the judgements and estimates used by management in these financial statements. These differences, which may be
           material, could require adjustment in those subsequent periods.

           For further discussion of critical accounting judgements and estimates applicable to critical reporting items, see
           Note 5 Investments, Note 11 Employee benefits, Note 12 Insurance contracts and Note 15 Insurance finance income
           and expense.
           Foreign currency translation
           WCB’s financial statements are presented in Canadian dollars, which is also the functional currency. Monetary
           assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currency are translated into Canadian dollars at the exchange rate in
           effect at the date of the Statement of Financial Position. Exchange differences arising from settlement of monetary
           items are included in income in the period in which they arise. Non-monetary assets and liabilities denominated in
           foreign currency are translated at the exchange rate in effect when those transactions occurred.
           Cash equivalents
           Cash equivalents include short-term, liquid investments that are readily convertible to known amounts of cash and
           are subject to an insignificant risk of change in value. Cash and short-term investments held as Guaranteed
           Investment Certificates (GICs) or within pooled funds are not typically available for general use and are accordingly
           included in investments.
           Finance expense
           Finance expense comprises primarily recognition of interest (i.e., time value of money) inherent in discounted
           liabilities. Significant discounted liabilities include insurance liabilities, employee benefit plans and lease obligations.

           SPECIFIC ACCOUNTING POLICIES
           To facilitate a better understanding of WCB’s financial statements, specific accounting policies are disclosed in the
           related notes:


                 Note       Topic                                                       Page


                  5.        Investments                                                  53

                  6.        Investment income and expense                                56

                  8.        Property, plant and equipment                                60

                  9.        Intangible assets                                            62

                 10.        Leases                                                       63

                 11.        Employee benefits                                            65

                 12.        Insurance contracts                                          69

                 13.        Insurance revenue and expenses                               77

                 15.        Insurance finance income and expense                         85




                                             WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                         - 50 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                      101
Other Financial Information




       3. ACCOUNTING POLICY CHANGES

           STANDARD, AMENDMENTS, AND INTERPRETATIONS EFFECTIVE IN CURRENT YEAR
           There were no new standards, amendments, or interpretations adopted in the current year.

           STANDARD, AMENDMENTS, AND INTERPRETATIONS ISSUED AS OF YEAR END BUT NOT YET EFFECTIVE

           Amendments to IFRS 9 Financial Instruments and IFRS 7 Financial Instruments: Disclosures
           On May 30, 2024, the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) issued Amendments to the Classification and
           Measurement of Financial Instruments (Amendments to IFRS 9 and IFRS 7).
           The key concepts introduced in these amendments include derecognition of financial liabilities based on electronic
           payment system dates, classification of financial assets based on contingent events, and separately disclosing
           derecognized assets in the reporting period.
           These amendments are effective for reporting periods beginning on or after January 1, 2026 with early adoption
           permitted. Restatement of comparative information is not required and is only permitted if possible, without the
           use of hindsight. WCB is in the process of assessing the impact of these amendments on the financial statements.

           IFRS 18 Presentation and Disclosure in Financial Statements
           On April 9, 2024, the IASB released IFRS 18 Presentation and Disclosure in Financial Statements (IFRS 18) to replace
           IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements. Many of the principles and requirements in IAS 1 will be retained with
           limited changes.
           The key concepts introduced in IFRS 18 primarily affect the structure (i.e., presentation format) of the statement of
           financial performance and comprehensive income; new note disclosures for certain profit or loss performance
           measures that are reported outside an entity’s financial statements (i.e., management-defined performance
           measures); and enhanced principles governing aggregation and disaggregation of results in the primary financial
           statements and notes.
           IFRS 18 will be effective for reporting periods beginning on or after January 1, 2027, with early adoption permitted.
           Retrospective restatement of comparative periods is required. WCB is in the process of assessing the impact of the
           new standard on the financial statements.




                                           WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                       - 51 -




102                                                                                    Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                              Other Financial Information




       4. FUND MANAGEMENT

           ACCIDENT FUND
           The Act establishes an Accident Fund (the Fund) to support a sustainable workers’ compensation system for the
           benefit of workers and employers. Sufficient funds must be available in the Accident Fund for the payment of
           present and future compensation, including the cost of administration.

           FUNDING POLICY AND CAPITAL MANAGEMENT
           Since the Act does not provide for an ownership-based capital structure, WCB views its available capital resources
           as synonymous with its Accident Fund balance. The primary objective in managing the financial status of the
           Accident Fund is to mitigate the risk of being unfunded, while a secondary objective is to minimize premium rate
           volatility caused by investment and claim liability risk. WCB manages the financial status of the Accident Fund by
           monitoring the funding level and making funding decisions in accordance with the Funding Policy.
           The Funding Policy prescribes that evaluation of the funding status of the Accident Fund be determined on a
           funding basis wherein the claim benefit obligations are valued reflecting a discount rate assumption that is linked to
           the long-term return of the investment portfolio. To guide funding decisions, the Funding Policy sets a funding level
           target range of 114–128% as measured on a funding basis. When the funding level (total assets divided by total
           liabilities measured on a funding basis) falls below the target range, special funding requirements may be included
           in premium rates. When the funding level is above the target range, surplus distributions may be paid.
           Special levies and surplus distributions are instruments of the Funding Policy, whose purpose is to replenish funding
           shortfalls or return excess funding to employers in order to maintain the funding level at the prescribed target level
           established by Funding Policy. Surplus funds may be distributed at the discretion of WCB Alberta. In the event of a
           surplus distribution the surplus is considered to be part of insurance liabilities under IFRS 17.

           FUNDING LEVEL
           As at December 31, 2024 the Funded Ratio of the Accident Fund (total assets divided by total liabilities measured
           on a funding basis), was 109.4% or $1.2 billion (2023 - 107.3% or $889.5 million). The funded ratio was below the
           funding level target range but exceeded the legislative requirement of 100%.
           As at December 31, 2024 the fund balance on the statement of financial position was in a deficiency position of
           $556.5 million (2023 - $729.8 million). Despite the fund balance deficiency, the mandate of the WCB and the
           Accident Fund allows for sufficient cash flows to continue operations and meet its obligations. Insurance liabilities
           have a long period to maturity, see the section Solvency risk in Note 14 Insurance risk and management about the
           relationship of investments and insurance liabilities.




                                            WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                        - 52 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                 103
Other Financial Information




       5. INVESTMENTS

           ACCOUNTING POLICY
           WCB’s portfolio investments are classified at fair value through income since its investment management
           objective is to hold investments for trading purposes and the portfolio is evaluated and managed on a fair value
           basis. All changes in fair value, including realized and unrealized gains or losses, are recorded in investment
           income.
           The Alberta Investment Management Corporation (AIMCo) is a Crown corporation of Alberta and the exclusive
           investment manager of WCB’s investment portfolio as established in Bill 22 on November 22, 2019. AIMCo
           manages investments through pooled funds for multiple pension, endowment, insurance and government fund
           clients. WCB’s investment portfolio is invested exclusively in pooled investment portfolios (pools) covering various
           asset classes and mandates. Participants hold redeemable units in these pools with rights to a proportionate
           share of the pool’s income and net assets, with no power to direct management of the fund. Consequently, WCB
           is indirectly and proportionately exposed only to the associated economic risks and rewards of the pool, based on
           its share of the total units in the respective pool. In WCB’s judgment, because the criteria for control of the pools
           are not met for consolidation or joint control accounting, it has determined that pools it holds units in are
           measured at fair value through income and does not report a proportional interest in the individual underlying
           assets and liabilities of the pools on its statement of financial position. WCB accounts for its investment in pools as
           financial instruments.
           As a financial instrument, the unit of the respective pools is the unit of account and basis of accounting. Pools are
           recognized in the Statement of Financial Position when WCB becomes party to the contractual provisions of the
           pool through purchase or transfer of the units. Similarly, pools are derecognized when WCB is no longer bound by
           the rights and obligations attached to the units.
           WCB utilizes trade-date accounting (i.e., the date when pools are purchased or redeemed) rather than at the date
           of their settlement. For recognition or derecognition of investment assets, WCB measures pools at their fair value
           as at the respective trade date. Transaction costs, if any, are immediately expensed.


           Fair value hierarchy
           The fair value of WCB’s investments recorded on the Statement of financial position was determined using one of
           the following valuation techniques:
           Level 1   Fair value is based on quoted prices in active markets for identical assets. The pools are not listed on
                     active markets, therefore, can not be classified as level 1 for fair value hierarchy purposes. Pools classified
                     by WCB as Level 2 may contain investments that might otherwise be classified as Level 1.
           Level 2   Fair value is based on inputs, other than Level 1 prices, such as quoted prices for similar assets, quoted
                     prices in markets that are not active or other inputs based on observable market data. Level 2 includes
                     pools invested in debt and public equity securities.
           Level 3   Fair value is based on unobservable inputs that are significant to the fair value of the assets and have little
                     or no market activity. Level 3 includes pools whose fair value is determined from valuations of underlying
                     holdings using pricing models, discounted cash flow methodologies or similar techniques that entail use
                     of significant judgement and/or unobservable inputs. This level includes pools invested in private
                     investments in mortgages, real estate, infrastructure and timberlands.




                                            WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                        - 53 -




104                                                                                     Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                              Other Financial Information




           The fair value of pools is derived from the fair value of the underlying financial instruments held within the pool as
           determined by AIMCo using methods that maximise the use of market observable inputs to the greatest extent
           possible and use in some instances, as noted below, unobservable inputs where market observable inputs are not
           available.
           Fixed income and real-return bonds
           Public interest-bearing securities are valued at the year-end closing sale price or the average of the latest bid and
           ask prices quoted by an independent securities valuation company. Private mortgages and debt are valued based on
           the net present value of future cash flows. Cash flows are discounted using risk adjusted interest rate premiums
           over similar Government of Canada benchmark bonds and current market yields for comparable securities.
           Equities
           Public equities are valued at the year-end closing sale price or the average of the latest bid and ask prices quoted by
           an independent securities valuation company.
           Real estate and timberlands
           The fair value of real estate and renewable resources (timberlands) investments is estimated using appraised values,
           net of any liabilities. Real Estate and Renewable Resources investments are appraised at least annually by qualified
           independent appraisers. Appraisers use a combination of methods to determine fair value, including replacement
           cost, direct comparison, capitalization of earnings, and discounted cash flows.
           Infrastructure
           The fair value of infrastructure investments is estimated using a combination of market approaches considering
           comparable companies, precedent transactions in comparable companies and investments, and discounted future
           cash flows. The fair value of investments held in pools and limited partnerships is estimated by the manager or
           general partner.




                                            WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                        - 54 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                 105
Other Financial Information




           The table below summarizes the basis of fair value measurements for financial assets held in WCB’s investment
           portfolio:
                                                                                    Fa i r v a l ue t hr oug h i nc om e
           ($ thousands)                                                    Level 1                Level 2                 Level 3                 2024                  2023
               Fi x e d i nc om e
                 Deposits and short-term investments1                   $                -     $      328,952         $             -         $      328,952        $      186,978
                 Nominal bonds                                                           -          3,249,290                       -              3,249,290             2,984,027
                 Mortgages                                                               -                  -                 583,616                583,616               489,926
                 Private debt                                                            -                  -                 211,754                211,754               110,426
                                                                                         -          3,578,242                 795,370              4,373,612             3,771,357

               E qui ti e s
                 Domestic                                                                -          1,395,052                          -           1,395,052             1,284,320
                 Foreign                                                                 -          3,447,784                          -           3,447,784             3,069,875
                                                                                         -          4,842,836                          -           4,842,836             4,354,195

               I n f l a t i on- s e n s i t i v e
                  Real estate                                                            -                  -               1,765,194            1,765,194             1,610,452
                  Infrastructure                                                         -                  -               2,214,044            2,214,044             2,090,776
                  Timberlands                                                            -                  -                     684                  684                   601
                  Real-return bonds                                                      -            690,425                       -              690,425               664,642
                                                                                         -            690,425               3,979,922            4,670,347             4,366,471
               T ot a l I n v e s t m e nt s                            $                -     $    9,111,503         $     4,775,292         $ 13,886,795          $ 12,492,023

           1
               Deposits and short-term investments include a Guaranteed Investment Certificate of $102.1 million (2023 - $nil) not held in AIMCo pools

           Transfers between levels
           There were no material transfers between levels during 2024 or 2023.
           Reconciliation of Level 3 activity

                                                                                                                               Infrastructure
           ($ thousands)                                             Mortgages         Private Debt         Real Estate                                    20 24          2023
                                                                                                                               & Timberlands

           B a l a nc e , b e g i n n i n g o f y e a r               $ 489,926         $    110,672       $ 1,610,452           $ 2,091,377             $ 4,302,427    $ 4,061,531
              Fair value changes                                         35,025               12,931            (9,893)              311,771                 349,834        133,635
              Purchases of Level 3 pools                                140,106               99,442           179,699                16,918                 436,165        400,829
              Sale/settlement of Level 3 pools                          (81,441)             (11,291)          (15,064)             (205,338)               (313,134)      (293,568)
           B a l a nc e , e n d o f y e a r                           $ 583,616         $    211,754       $ 1,765,194           $ 2,214,728             $ 4,775,292    $ 4,302,427


           Investment funding commitments
           Private investments in pools managed by AIMCo have significant future capital commitments. Although the total
           commitment is known, the timing and amount of future funding calls are uncertain, as they are contingent on
           availability of appropriate investment opportunities. Under these circumstances, pool participants have an indirect
           constructive obligation to fund their proportionate share of the respective pools if and when these opportunities
           are realized.
           WCB’s pro rata share of AIMCo’s total unfunded commitments as at December 31, 2024, was estimated at
           approximately $172,493 (2023 - $248,064).




                                                               WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                                - 55 -




106                                                                                                               Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                                                                               Other Financial Information




       6. INVESTMENT INCOME AND EXPENSE

           ACCOUNTING POLICY
           WCB recognizes its proportionate share of investment income, earned and distributed to participants of the
           pool, concurrently with investment gain or loss at remeasurement of the pool. Investment income and fair value
           remeasurement gains and losses are recognized in income in the period in which they arise. Investment expense
           comprises primarily external fund management fees and pool costs and internal investment administration
           expenses.


           Investment income
                                                                                                   Investment Gains
           ($ thousands)                                                   Income1                                                        2024                          2023
                                                                                                         (Losses)2
               Fi x e d i nc om e
                   Deposits and short-term investments               $              24,393         $                  -          $              24,393          $              18,665
                   Nominal bonds                                                    66,398                         84,677                      151,075                        230,730
                   Mortgages                                                        21,796                         15,794                       37,590                         19,205
                   Private debt                                                      8,833                         4,695                        13,528                          4,543
                                                                                   121,420                       105,166                       226,586                        273,143
               E qui ti e s
                  Domestic equities                                                114,397                       138,061                       252,458                        145,660
                   Foreign equities                                                387,134                       368,913                       756,047                        432,860
                                                                                   501,531                       506,974                     1,008,505                        578,520
               I n f l a t i o n - s e ns i t i v e
                    Real estate                                                     44,715                        (42,869)                         1,846                      (74,880)
                   Infrastructure                                                  195,935                       139,459                       335,394                        235,675
                   Timberlands                                                           8                            77                            85                         (2,854)
                   Real return bonds                                                29,499                        (1,943)                       27,556                        11,945
                                                                                   270,157                        94,724                       364,881                       169,886
                                                                    $              893,108        $              706,864         $           1,599,972         $           1,021,549

           Investment Expense
           ($ thousands)                                                                                                                  2024                          2023

           External management fees                                                                                               $              72,749         $              80,998
           Investment administration 3                                                                                                            1,148                         1,290
                                                                                                                                  $              73,897         $              82,288

           1
                Income represents income from interest, dividends and fund distributions earned by the respective pools and proportionately allocated to participants based on units held.
           2
                Investment gains (losses) include realized gains and losses from disposition of pools based on average cost and unrealized gains or losses from remeasurement of the pools at the
                reporting date.
           3
                Investment administration represents internal investment management expenses, see Note 16 Administration and Other Expense.




                                                               WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                                - 56 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                                                                                107
Other Financial Information




       7. INVESTMENT RISK MANAGEMENT
           INVESTMENT GOVERNANCE
           The Board of Directors is ultimately responsible for overall strategic direction and governance of the investment
           portfolio through its review and approval of the Investment Policy Statement and ongoing oversight of investment
           risks, performance and compliance.
           WCB management is responsible for monitoring the investment portfolio, assessment of AIMCo performance and
           recommending changes to the Investment Policy Statement. WCB retains independent consultants to benchmark
           the performance of its investment portfolio and to advise on the appropriateness and effectiveness of its
           investment policy and practices.

           KEY FINANCIAL RISKS
           The primary financial risk for WCB is the risk that, in the long term, returns from its investments will not be
           sufficient to discharge all obligations arising from its insurance liabilities. In order to manage this funding risk, risk
           management for investments has been integrated with risk management of liabilities. The Investment Policy
           Statement target asset mix and associated risk and return characteristics, have been established to provide
           guidelines for maintaining a well-diversified portfolio operating within a rigorous compliance framework.
           WCB has identified key areas of investment risk that directly affect the sufficiency of its investments to fund current
           and future claim obligations:
           Equity market risk
           Equity market risk is the risk that the fair value of pools will decline due to future fluctuations in market prices of
           underlying publicly traded equities held in the respective pools. A change in market value of an equity pools is
           considered significant when it exceeds one standard deviation of the normal range of its historical market returns.
           The table below provides an estimate of the impact on the carrying value of equity pools of a significant adverse
           change1 in the key risk variable - the amount of equity market volatility:

           ($ thousands)                                                                                                              2024                           2023
           E qui ti e s                                                                                                            1 std de v                      1 std dev
           % change in portfolio                                                                                                          (14.1%)                         (15.8%)
           Canadian                                                                                                          $             (196,038)        $            (203,053)
           % change in portfolio                                                                                                             (13.3%)                       (13.4%)
           Global                                                                                                            $             (365,897)        $            (322,888)
           % change in portfolio                                                                                                             (14.5%)                        (14.5%)
           Emerging markets                                                                                                  $              (98,915)        $              (90,603)
           1
            A change is considered to be material when it exceeds the standard deviation (std dev), which measures the variance in a normal probability distribution. One standard deviation
           covers 68% of all probable outcomes. The benchmark deviations are based on 2024 data.




                                                            WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                             - 57 -




108                                                                                                             Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                                                              Other Financial Information




           Interest rate risk
           Interest rate risk is the risk that the fair value of pools will decline due to future increases in market interest rates.
           The table below provides an estimate of the impact on the carrying value of fixed income pools if market interest
           rates increased by 50 and 100 bps1:

           ($ thousands)                                                                 20 24                                           2023
           Change in nominal interest rate                               +5 0 bps                    + 1 00 bps               +50 bps              +100 bps
           Nominal bonds                                          $           (119,086)      $             (238,173)      $       (112,041)   $        (224,082)
           Real return bonds                                      $            (43,428)      $              (86,856)      $        (44,332)   $          (88,663)
           Mortgages                                              $            (12,022)      $              (24,045)      $        (10,484)   $          (20,969)
           Private debt                                           $               (741)      $               (1,482)      $           (221)   $             (442)
           1
               One basis point (bp) equals 1/100 of 1%; 50 bps = 50/100 of 1% or 0.5%.


           Foreign currency risk
           Foreign currency risk is the risk that the fair value of pools containing underlying financial assets and financial
           liabilities denominated in foreign currencies will fluctuate due to changes in their respective exchange rates. WCB
           has indirect proportionate foreign currency exposures through pools that are economically hedged to the Canadian
           dollar based on target hedge ratios (i.e., percentage of the exposure hedged to Canadian dollars) by asset class and
           currency. The target for fixed income and infrastructure pools is 100%. For foreign equity pools, the target is 25% for
           the U.S. dollar and 50% for other major currencies.
           WCB’s largest indirect foreign currency exposures are to the U.S. dollar and the euro which are shown in the table
           below. All other currencies have unhedged exposures of $496,000 (2023 - $407,782).
           The table below presents the currency exposure and provides an estimate of the impact on the carrying value of
           the portfolio should the Canadian dollar appreciate 10% against the reference currency:

           ($ thousands)                                                                 20 24                                           2023

                                                                      U nh e d g e d                1 0% C A D            Unhedged Foreign         10% CAD
                                                                  For e i g n e x posur e        a p p r e c i a t i on      exposure             appreciation
           USD                                                    $           2,390,171      $               (217,288)    $      2,103,045    $         (191,186)
           EUR                                                    $             186,903      $                (16,991)    $        159,291    $          (14,481)



           Credit risk
           Credit risk refers to possible risk of loss resulting from the borrower failing to repay a loan or fulfil its contractual
           obligations. WCB has indirect exposure to credit risk mainly through pools containing debt securities and derivative
           contracts. The fair value of all investments is directly or indirectly impacted by credit risk to some degree. The
           majority of investments in debt securities have credit ratings considered to be investment grade. Unrated debt
           securities consist primarily of mortgages and private debt.
           Credit spread risk
           Credit spread risk arises from changes in general financial market or economic conditions that may change the
           pricing of the entire non-government bond market, specific sectors or individual issuers. This risk is generally
           manifested through changes in the security’s credit spread, which reflects the risk premium or risk-adjusted yield
           for specific issuers and/or instruments. WCB’s investment portfolio is indirectly exposed to credit spread risk
           through participation in pools with holdings in non-government fixed income securities.




                                                              WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                            - 58 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                                                    109
Other Financial Information




           Counterparty default risk
           Counterparty default risk arises from the possibility that the issuer of a debt security, or the counterparty to a
           derivatives contract, fails to discharge its contractual obligations. pools that hold fixed income products manage
           credit risk by investing in securities of high credit quality. As a portfolio strategy, derivatives may be used within
           pools to manage specific characteristics and exposures, with derivative counterparties subject to minimum credit
           rating requirements. For all pools that hold derivatives, the maximum counterparty default risk exposure is the fair
           value of all derivative contracts in a favourable (i.e., receivable) position.
           Liquidity risk
           Liquidity risk is the risk that WCB will encounter difficulty in meeting obligations associated with its insurance
           liabilities, which are funded from cash and cash equivalents and from investments where necessary. This risk stems
           from the lack of marketability of an investment that cannot be bought or sold quickly enough to prevent or
           minimize a loss. Pools that hold private investments with no active market, or subject to contractual restrictions on
           redemption or transfer, would be exposed to liquidity risk. In addition, these pools may have significant capital
           commitments that must also be funded from other investments or cash and cash equivalents as required.
           Through a proactive cash management process that entails continuous forecasting of expected cash flows, WCB
           mitigates liquidity risk by minimizing the need for forced liquidations of pools in volatile markets and by allocating a
           significant portion of the investment portfolio to pools holding securities with high trading volume in active
           markets.
           To cover unanticipated cash requirements when market conditions are unfavourable, WCB also has an available
           standby line of credit of up to $20 million, with provision for it to increase to $100 million for six months during the
           year, which has not been drawn down as at December 31, 2024 or 2023.




                                            WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                        - 59 -




110                                                                                     Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                               Other Financial Information




       8. PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT

           ACCOUNTING POLICY
           Property, plant and equipment expenditures are recognized as an asset if it is probable that WCB will realize
           future economic benefits. Items are initially measured at acquisition cost and subsequently at amortized cost.
           WCB enters into leases of property, plant and equipment and contracts for supply of goods and services conveying
           a right to use identified assets that requires lease recognition. The resulting right-of-use asset is classified under
           the applicable class of property, plant, and equipment, and accounted for in accordance with the relevant
           accounting policy for that class.
           After initial recognition, property, plant and equipment is carried at acquisition cost less accumulated depreciation
           and impairment (if applicable) with the exception of land, which is not depreciated. Leased assets and leasehold
           improvements are amortized over their expected lease term, including probable extensions or early termination
           and adjusted for impairment. All other items are depreciated over their expected economic or useful life.
           Depreciation expense is recognized when an asset is ready for use, and when WCB has control over the use of a
           lease asset.
           Residual values, useful lives, expected lease terms, and depreciation/amortization rates are reviewed at each
           financial year-end and adjusted if appropriate. Depreciation and amortization expense are included in insurance
           expense and corporate administration in the Statement of Financial Performance and Comprehensive Income (see
           Note 16 Administration and Other Expense).
           WCB applies the following annual rates and methods for depreciation of owned assets:
             Buildings ................................................ 2.5% straight-line
             Leasehold improvements ...................... Straight-line over the expected lease term
             Computer equipment ............................ 35% declining balance
             Furniture and equipment ...................... 15% declining balance
             Vehicles .................................................. 20% straight-line
           For leased assets, WCB applies straight-line amortization over the expected lease term.
           WCB evaluates its property, plant and equipment for indicators of impairment such as obsolescence, redundancy,
           deterioration, loss or reduction in future service potential, or when there is a change in intended use or
           underutilization of an owned and/or a right-of-use asset. When the carrying value exceeds the amount of future
           economic benefit based on expected utilization, the item of property, plant and equipment is written down to the
           recoverable amount and the amount recognized as an impairment loss.




                                             WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                         - 60 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                   111
Other Financial Information




           The following table provides details of property, plant and equipment (PPE) broken down between assets acquired
           through purchase and right-of-use assets arising from leasing.

                                                                                 Land /       Leasehold      Computer     Furniture &
           ($ thousands)                                                        Buildings   Improvements     Equipment    Equipment
                                                                                                                                        Vehicles           2 024          2023

           O w n e d a s s e t s, a t c os t
           Balance, beginning of year                                           $ 75,253    $     1,860      $ 20,891     $ 31,835      $    374       $ 130,213      $ 126,154
           Current period activity:
               Capitalized expenditure                                               865             10         9,205         5,512            -            15,592          4,812
               Transfer from PPE under construction                                 (608)             -        (5,725)       (3,093)           -            (9,426)        (4,538)
               Disposals                                                               -              -        (1,187)         (418)           -            (1,605)        (5,639)
               PPE under construction                                                  -              -         1,780         1,993            -             3,773          9,424
           B a l a nc e , e nd o f y e a r                                        75,510          1,870        24,964        35,829          374           138,547        130,213



           A c c um ul a t e d de p r e c i a t i on a n d i m p a i r m e nt
           Balance, beginning of year                                             33,938          1,685        10,467        21,033          374            67,497         67,260
           Current period activity:
               Depreciation                                                        1,602             61         3,602         1,660            -             6,925          5,549
               Disposals                                                               -              -        (1,187)         (418)           -            (1,605)        (5,312)
           B a l a nc e , e nd o f y e a r                                        35,540          1,746        12,882        22,275          374            72,817         67,497

           Carrying value, beginning of year                                      41,315            175        10,424        10,802                -        62,716         58,894
           C a r r yi n g va l u e , e n d of ye a r                              39,970            124        12,082        13,554                -        65,730         62,716

           R i g h t - o f - u s e a s se t s , a t c os t
           Balance, beginning of year                                              7,847                 -       8,240          561                -        16,648         15,736
           Current period activity:
                Capitalized lease expenditure                                          -                 -       2,234           95                -         2,329          2,123
                Disposals                                                              -                 -      (4,517)         (93)               -        (4,610)        (1,211)
           B a l a nc e , e nd o f y e a r                                         7,847                 -       5,957          563                -        14,367         16,648



           A c c um ul a t e d de p r e c i a t i on a n d i m p a i r m e nt
           Balance, beginning of year                                              4,196                 -       5,284          257                -         9,737          7,573
           Current period activity:
               Depreciation                                                          882                 -       1,793          105                -         2,780          3,375
               Disposals                                                               -                 -      (4,517)         (93)               -        (4,610)        (1,211)
           B a l a nc e , e nd o f y e a r                                         5,078                 -       2,560          269                -         7,907          9,737

           Carrying value, beginning of year                                       3,651                 -       2,956          304                -         6,911          8,163
           C a r r yi n g va l u e , e n d of ye a r                               2,769                 -       3,397          294                -         6,460          6,911

           T ot a l ow n e d a nd r i g ht - of - use a sse t s
           Carrying value, beginning of year                                      44,966            175        13,380       11,106                 -        69,627         67,057
           C a r r yi n g va l u e , e n d of ye a r                            $ 42,739    $       124      $ 15,479     $ 13,848      $          -   $    72,190    $    69,627



           See Note 10 Leases for accounting policy and further details on leased property, plant and equipment and Note 16
           Administration and Other Expense for depreciation expense.
           WCB has contractual commitments to complete various projects under construction. As at December 31, 2024,
           these commitments total $3,739 (2023 - $5,840).




                                                                    WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                                - 61 -




112                                                                                                              Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                                                                   Other Financial Information




       9. INTANGIBLE ASSETS

           ACCOUNTING POLICY
           WCB’s intangible assets are composed of computer software developed internally or acquired through third party
           vendors and customized as necessary. Development expenditure is capitalized only if the directly related costs
           (both internal and external) can be measured reliably, the product or process is technically feasible, future
           economic benefits are probable and WCB has the intention and sufficient resources to complete development
           and to use the asset in the manner intended.
           Computer software is measured at cost upon initial recognition. After initial recognition, computer software is
           measured at cost less accumulated amortization and impairment (if applicable). Computer software is amortized
           on a straight-line basis at 20% per year commencing from the date that the software is available for use.
           Residual value, useful lives and amortization methods are reviewed at each financial year-end and adjusted if
           appropriate. Amortization expense is included in insurance expense and corporate administration in the
           Statement of Financial Performance and Comprehensive Income (see Note 16 Administration and Other Expense).
           WCB evaluates its intangible assets for indicators of impairment and performs annual impairment tests for assets
           under development. When the carrying value exceeds the amount of future economic benefit through utilization,
           the item is written down to the recoverable amount and the amount recognized as an impairment loss.


                                                                                                             Under
           ($ thousands)                                                          In Use                                          2 02 4                 2023
                                                                                                          Development

           C ost
           Balance, beginning of year                                       $         139,219         $           3,043     $        142,262        $      134,970
              Capitalized expenditure                                                          -                  4,449                    4,449                7,594
              Transfers from development                                                   4,594                 (4,594)                       -                    -
              Disposals                                                                        -                        -                      -                (302)
           B a l a nc e , e nd of yea r                                               143,813                     2,898              146,711               142,262

           A c c um ul a t e d a m or t iz a t i on a nd im pa i r m e nt
           Balance, beginning of year                                                 106,137                           -            106,137                91,635
              Depreciation                                                             14,773                           -              14,773               14,804
              Disposals                                                                        -                        -                      -                (302)


           B a l a nc e , e nd of yea r                                               120,910                           -            120,910               106,137

           Carrying value, beginning of year                                           33,082                     3,043                36,125               43,335
           C a r r y i ng v a l u e , e n d of y e a r                      $          22,903         $           2,898     $          25,801       $       36,125


           WCB has contractual commitments related to the completion of software projects. As at December 31, 2024, these
           commitments total $4,467 (2023 - $2,793).




                                                                WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                             - 62 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                                                        113
Other Financial Information




       10. LEASES

           ACCOUNTING POLICY
           At inception of a lease or supply contract, WCB recognizes a right-of-use asset and a corresponding lease liability if
           both of the following conditions have been met throughout the contract period:
                   WCB has the right to obtain substantially all the economic benefits from use of an identified asset; and
                   WCB has the right to direct the use of the identified asset throughout the period of use.
           The lease term begins at the commencement date, extends through the non-cancellable period of the lease and
           includes any renewal periods or early termination options that WCB is likely to exercise.
           At the commencement date, WCB measures the lease liability at cost, representing the present value of the lease
           payments that are not paid at that date, discounted using the interest rate implicit in the lease if it is known or
           readily determinable. If not, WCB uses its incremental borrowing rate as at that date for a loan of similar amount,
           payment terms, and maturity. The right-of-use asset is measured at the amount of the lease liability, less any lease
           incentives received and/or lease payments made at or before the lease commencement date. As well, at the
           commencement date, incentives received or due from the lessor to enter into or to extend the lease are
           recognized, measured at their present value and offset against the right-of-use asset.
           Leases with low value assets (unit value of $5,000 or less), and leases with an expected term of 12 months or less
           at date of commencement are exempt from the requirements to recognize a right-of-use asset and lease liability.
           Although exempt, WCB applies IFRS 16 to groups of low value desktop computer equipment acquired under a
           master lease agreement. These lease asset pools (portfolios) are measured at their aggregate present value as at
           their commencement date, recognized as right-of-use assets and related lease obligations.
           Subsequent measurement of right-of-use assets and liabilities for leases of individual assets and asset pools is at
           amortized cost. Right-of-use assets are depreciated on a straight-line basis over their expected lease term.
           Lease payments are allocated between the liability and finance charges using the effective interest method to
           achieve a constant rate of interest on the remaining balance of the lease. The interest portion of the payment is
           charged to income over the lease period, while the principal portion is applied against the lease obligation.


           LEASES
           Leasing objectives
           WCB’s rationale for acquiring critical business assets through leasing is to realize operational flexibility, rather than
           to finance asset ownership. For critical information technology and office equipment, WCB uses leasing to manage
           obsolescence risk, to provide operational flexibility in meeting both short and long-term business demands and to
           access value-added services bundled with certain lease arrangements. For some critical technology, vendor pricing
           is more cost-effective through leasing rather than purchasing. For facilities, the economic benefits from leasing
           accrue mainly from flexibility in meeting short-term space demands, acquiring office space that does not warrant a
           long-term capital investment in real assets, but in some circumstances, the required space is only available through
           a long-term lease.
           Lease obligations
           WCB has obligations under non-cancellable lease agreements for computer and office equipment, typically for
           terms between three and five years. Some WCB facilities are under leases with remaining terms of between one
           and four years. On rare occasions, WCB may enter into short-term arrangements for office space and/or for low
           value assets; however, such commitments and the amounts charged to administration expense are generally not
           material.


                                            WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                        - 63 -




114                                                                                     Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                                                Other Financial Information




       The following table provides a reconciliation of lease transactions and obligations for the period ended December 31,
       2024.
                                                                      Computer              Furniture &
           ($ thousands)                   Land / Buildings                                                          2024             2023
                                                                      Equipment             Equipment
           L e a se obl i g a ti ons
           Balance, beginning of year      $           4,366      $          3,028      $             309        $      7,703     $       8,861
           Current year activity:
               Additions                                   -                  2,234                    95                2,329            2,123
               Disposals                                   -                      -                     -                    -             (489)
               Lease payments                         (1,081)                (1,893)                 (116)              (3,090)          (3,051)
               Lease interest                            132                    115                    23                  270              259
            B a l a nc e , e nd of yea r   $           3,417      $           3,484     $             311        $       7,212    $       7,703


           See Note 8 Property, Plant and Equipment for carrying values of lease right-of-use assets and their related
           depreciation and Note 19(b) Trade and Other Liabilities for presentation of lease obligations.
           The undiscounted future cash outflows and the maturities related to these lease obligations are broken out in the
           table below.
           ($ thousands)                                                                                             2024             2023

           2024                                                                                                  $        -       $       2,606
           2025                                                                                                         2,857             2,082
           2026                                                                                                         2,291             1,516
           2027                                                                                                         1,560             1,216
           2028                                                                                                           331               191
           2029 and Beyond                                                                                                706               706
                                                                                                                 $      7,745     $       8,317

           Exempt leases
           Leases for low value assets or for terms of twelve months or less are exempt from the requirements to recognize a
           right-of-use asset and lease liability and are charged to expense as incurred. Exempt lease expense for the year was
           insignificant.




                                               WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                           - 64 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                                   115
Other Financial Information




       11. EMPLOYEE BENEFITS

           ACCOUNTING POLICY
           WCB provides active service and defined post-employment benefits to its employees. WCB also participates in
           certain multi-employer pension plans sponsored by the province of Alberta. An expense and a liability for benefits
           earned are recognized in the period that the employee service has been rendered.
           For defined post-employment benefit plans, current service cost represents the actuarial present value of the
           benefits earned in the current period. Such cost is actuarially determined using the projected unit credit actuarial
           method, a market interest rate and management’s best estimate of projected benefit costs. The net plan asset or
           liability as at the reporting date is the present value of the defined benefit obligation, which is determined by
           discounting the estimated future cash outflows using a discount rate based on market yields of high-quality
           corporate bonds having terms to maturity that approximate the duration of the related benefit liability less the
           fair value of plan assets. Current service cost and interest expense of pension and other post-employment
           benefits are estimated using different discount rates derived from the same yields, reflecting the different timing
           of benefit payments for past service (the defined benefit obligation) and future service (the current service cost).
           Current service cost, interest expense and interest income comprise the amount required in each year to build up
           the liability over the projected benefit period to its future value.
           Remeasurement changes in plan assets and benefit liabilities, arising from actuarial changes in assumptions and
           experience gains and losses, are recognized in other comprehensive income.


           ACTIVE SERVICE BENEFITS
           WCB’s short-term benefits for active employees include salary, compensated absence (sick leave, statutory holidays,
           and annual vacation), group life insurance, dental and medical coverage, employee family assistance program,
           education support and health and wellness benefits.
           Termination benefits are provided for through employment contracts, statutory requirements or constructive
           obligations. As at December 31, 2024 and 2023, there were no material expenditures or provisions relating to
           termination benefits.

           POST-EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS
           Pension plans
           Employee post-retirement benefits are provided through contributory multi-employer defined benefit pension
           plans sponsored by the province of Alberta, namely the Public Service Pension Plan (PSPP) and the Management
           Employees Pension Plan (MEPP). Under defined benefit plan accounting, WCB must recognize its proportionate
           share, determined on an actuarial basis, of plan assets, obligations, remeasurement amounts, service cost, interest
           expense and interest income prorated on WCB’s share of total contributions.
           The information in this note reflects the annual actuarial valuation of WCB’s share of the plans’ assets, benefit
           obligations, remeasurement amounts, service cost, interest expense and interest income.
           Supplemental executive retirement plan
           WCB sponsors a non-contributory supplemental executive retirement plan (SERP). Earnings of senior management
           generally exceed the threshold earnings for the maximum pension benefit permitted under the federal Income Tax
           Act. Under the terms of the SERP, senior management is entitled to receive supplemental retirement payments that
           bring their total pension benefits to a level consistent with their total earnings for service since the inception of the




                                            WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                        - 65 -




116                                                                                     Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Other Financial Information




           SERP or appointment to a senior management position, whichever is later. Future pension benefits are based on the
           participants’ years of service and earnings.
           See Note 17 Related Party Transactions for a breakdown of SERP costs by executive position.
           Post-retirement benefit plan
           WCB provides a contributory benefit plan that provides dental and health care benefits to retirees on pensions
           between the ages of 55 to 80. As plan participants pay part of the benefit cost, the benefit obligation represents the
           difference between actual costs and contributions subsidized by WCB.

           OTHER BENEFIT PLANS
           Long-term disability plan
           WCB administers a self-insured non-contributory long-term disability (LTD) income continuance plan for its
           employees. The LTD liability represents the present value of all future obligations arising from disability claims
           incurred up to and including the reporting date.

           EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PLAN ASSUMPTIONS
           The table below presents key assumptions applicable to WCB’s employee future benefit plans.
                                                                                                                              2024                                                                               2023
                                                                                                                                                 P os t
                                                                                     PSPP               M EPP               SER P                                    LTD              PSPP        MEPP          SERP        Post         LTD
                                                                                                                                           R e ti r e m e nt
           D a t e o f m o s t r e c e n t a c t u a r i a l v a l ua t i o n    1 2 /3 1 /2 0 2 4   1 2 /3 1 / 20 2 4   1 2 /3 1/2 0 24    1 2 /3 1 / 2 0 2 4   1 2 /3 1 /2 02 4   12/31/2023   12/31/2023   12/31/2023 12/31/2023    12/31/2023

           E c ono m i c a s s um p ti ons

           Discount rate (nominal) for benefit obligation                            4.7%                4.7%                4.7%               4.8%                 4.8%             4.6%         4.6%         4.6%       4.7%          4.6%

           Alberta inflation rate (long-term)                                        2.0%                2.0%                2.0%                 n/a                 n/a             2.0%         2.0%         2.0%        n/a           n/a

                                           1                                                                                                                     2024: 3.0%;                                                          2024: 3.0%
           Salary escalation rate                                                    3.0%                3.0%                3.0%                 n/a                                 3.0%         2.8%         3.0%        n/a
                                                                                                                                                                 >2024: 2.0%                                                          >2024 2.0%
           M ul t i - e m p l oy e r p l a n f u n d i n g a s su m p ti on s

           WCB share of plan contributory payroll                                    5.8%                1.6%                                                                         5.7%         1.7%

           Current service cost rate on contributory payroll                         14.6%              21.8%                                                                        13.9%        23.6%

           WCB's contributions for the current period
                                                                                 $      15,382 $              1,266                                                                 $ 14,141 $ 1,232
           ($ thousands)
           WCB's expected contributions for the following
                                                                                 $      15,843 $              1,304                                                                 $ 14,565 $ 1,240
           period ($ thousands)

           1
               The salary escalation rate assumptions for the PSPP and the MEPP (both multi-employer plans) are not specific to WCB but rather to all participating employers in aggregate.




                                                                                WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                                                                - 66 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                                                                                                                                    117
Other Financial Information




           DEFINED BENEFIT PLANS
                                                                                    Other                                   Total Other
           ($ thousands)                                                          Retirement                  LTD            Employee                    1
                                                                                                                                             Pension Plans        2024            2023
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                     Liabilities                            Benefit Plans
           C ha ng e i n d e f i ne d be n e f i t o bl i g a t i on
           Defined benefit obligation, beginning of year                         $        20,735          $     24,828      $     45,563     $    545,366     $   590,929     $   495,818
                                               3
                  Current service cost                                                        997                3,698             4,695           17,582          22,277          21,717
                                          4
                  Interest expense                                                            958                1,057             2,015           24,562          26,577          25,622
                                                          5
                  Remeasurement losses (gains)                                              3,274                   872            4,146            4,446           8,592          73,734
                  Benefit payments                                                           (453)              (4,378)           (4,831)          (22,558)        (27,389)        (25,962)
           Defined benefit obligation, end of year                                        25,511                26,077            51,588          569,398         620,986         590,929


           C h a n g e i n f a i r v a l u e o f p l a n a s se t s
           Fair value of plan assets, beginning of year                                       -                     -                -            580,016         580,016         513,650
                  Employer contributions                                                      453                4,378             4,831           16,648          21,479          19,694
                  Interest income                                                                     -                 -            -             26,519          26,519          27,067
                                                          5
                  Remeasurement (losses) gains                                                        -                 -            -             61,186          61,186          45,567
                                                                      6
                  Effect of asset ceiling/onerous liability                                           -                              -             (92,413)        (92,413)              -
                 Benefit payments                                                            (453)              (4,378)           (4,831)          (22,558)        (27,389)        (25,962)
           Fair value of plan assets, end of year                                                     -                 -                -        569,398         569,398         580,016


           N e t p l a n l i a b i l i t y ( a s se t )
                 Defined benefit obligation                                               25,511                26,077            51,588          569,398         620,986         590,929
                 Fair value of plan assets                                                            -                 -                -        569,398         569,398         580,016
                                                                                 $        25,511          $     26,077      $     51,588     $           -    $    51,588     $    10,913

           1
               Pension plans include WCB’s proportionate share of the PSPP and MEPP defined benefit plans. The PSPP makes up the majority of the balance.
           2
               Other retirement liabilities include SERP and the post-retirement benefit plan.
           3
               Current service costs are presented within corporate administration and insurance expense in the Statement of Financial Performance and Comprehensive Income.
           4
               Interest expense is presented net of interest income in the Statement of Financial Performance and Comprehensive Income.
           5
               Remeasurement gains and losses on plan obligations due to discount rate changes and experience are presented net of gains and losses on plan assets in the Statement of
               Financial Performance and Comprehensive Income.
           6
               The asset ceiling limits the recognized asset to the amount of the defined benefit obligation.




                                                                          WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                                              - 67 -




118                                                                                                                             Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                                                        Other Financial Information




           RECOGNITION OF A PENSION ASSET
           A defined benefit pension plan asset recognized in the financial statements is measured at the lower of the plan
           surplus and the asset ceiling determined using the discount rate for measuring plan obligations at the valuation
           date. The asset ceiling is based on an assessment of whether the plan surplus will result in future economic benefit
           available to WCB through contribution reductions, payment of expenses from the plan, or refund of surplus. As of
           December 31, 2024, WCB determined the future benefit of the plan surplus is not fully available to WCB, therefore
           the asset ceiling limits the recognized asset to the amount of the defined benefit obligation.
           Economic risks
           Defined benefit plans are directly exposed to economic risks from plan assets invested in capital markets and
           indirectly with respect to measurement risk from assumptions based on economic factors, such as discount rates
           affected by volatile bond markets. Benefit obligations are exposed to uncertainty of future economic conditions,
           primarily inflation risk due to the extremely long tails of post-employment benefits and health care escalation due
           to increasingly higher costs of treatment and prescription drugs.
           Demographic risks
           Demographic factors affect current and future benefit costs with respect to the amount and time horizon of
           expected payments due to such factors as workforce average age and earnings levels, attrition and retirement rates,
           mortality and morbidity rates, etc.
           Multi-employer plan funding risk
           In addition to economic and demographic risk factors, WCB is exposed to funding risk in the multi-employer plans
           arising from:
                   Legislative changes affecting eligibility for and amount of pension and related benefits
                   Changes in contributions to respond to the plans’ funding level as required by policy
                   Performance of plan assets affected by investment policies set by the pension boards
                   Changes in the methods and assumptions used in valuation of plan liabilities.
           Because these plans are governed by legislation rather than contract, there is little flexibility for participant action
           with respect to withdrawal from the plan, plan wind-up or amendments and mandatory funding requirements.
           Sensitivity analysis
           The following table shows the effect of a 25 basis point change in the assumed discount rate, inflation rate and
           wage inflation rate on WCB’s proportionate share of the accrued benefit obligations of PSPP and MEPP. The impacts
           of the assumption changes on WCB’s other employee benefit plans, individually and in aggregate, are immaterial.

           ($ thousands)                                                                                   2024                             2023
           +/- % change on assumed rates                                                         + 0 .2 5 %       - 0 .2 5 %        +0.25%           -0.25%
           Discount rate based on market yields on high-quality corporate bonds                $     (20,194)   $      20,194     $   (19,606)   $      19,606
           General inflation rate                                                              $       9,350    $       (9,350)   $     8,869    $       (8,869)
           Wage inflation rate                                                                 $       3,781    $       (3,781)   $     3,683    $       (3,683)




                                                     WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                  - 68 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                                                   119
Other Financial Information




       12. INSURANCE CONTRACTS

           ACCOUNTING POLICY
           An insurance contract is an arrangement whereby an entity accepts significant insurance risk from another party
           by agreeing to compensate the insured party if a specified uncertain future event (the insured event) adversely
           affects that party. Since an insurance contract may also arise from law or regulation, WCB legislation and
           regulations (together the Act) constitute a master insurance contract. Self-insurance arrangements are not in
           scope as there is no transfer of insurance risk.
           The level of aggregation and unit of account is the entire portfolio of contracts viewed as one group of contracts
           sharing similar risk characteristics covered under a master contract renewed annually.
           The contract boundary is one year, corresponding to the calendar year coverage period established by legislation.
           Because WCB has the practical ability to reassess and fully reprice the group of contracts to cover its risk exposure
           specific to the renewal period, each annual cohort constitutes the issuance of a new group of contracts with a
           one-year term.
           Recognition of a group of insurance contracts at its inception occurs at the earliest of the following dates:
                At the beginning of the coverage period
                Due date of first payment of the premium
                When a group of contracts is determined to be onerous.
           Onerous insurance contracts arise when it is that the future cash outflows will exceed inflows.
           Contract modification arises from substantive changes in legislation, policy, or tribunal decisions that modify the
           scope and significance of contractual terms and conditions, requiring derecognition of the existing contract and
           recognition of the modified contract at the end of the coverage period.
           The following prescribed components are applied for measurement of insurance contracts:

                Unbiased expected present value of future cash flows
                Current and market consistent discount rates, derived from a yield curve based on comparable cash flows,
                 timing, and risk characteristics of the insurance liabilities
                A risk adjustment that quantifies the uncertainty related to non-financial risks in the estimates of the
                 future cash flows, representing the compensation required for bearing such risk.
           Given the one year contract boundary, the premium allocation approach applies in valuation of the liability for
           remaining coverage.
           The carrying amount of a group of insurance contracts at the end of each reporting period comprises the:
                Liability for remaining coverage representing the amount of premiums received less insurance revenue
                 recognized and the expected loss component of onerous contracts, if any; and
                Liability for incurred claims representing cash outflows (i.e., claim benefit and administration payments) in
                 future periods for claims incurred in the current and prior periods.
           At the end of each reporting period, the carrying value of insurance contracts is remeasured to reflect current
           estimates of the liability for incurred claims. The liability for remaining coverage is increased for premiums
           received in the period and decreased for the amounts of expected premium receipts recognized as insurance
           revenue for the services provided in the period.




                                            WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                        - 69 -




120                                                                                     Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                             Other Financial Information




           VALUATION OF INSURANCE CONTRACTS
           The valuation is based on WCB legislation, policies and administrative practices in effect as at the valuation date.
           Estimation of the liability requires the use of actuarial methods and assumptions that are periodically assessed and
           adjusted based on frequent monitoring of actual claim experience, the economy and other relevant factors
           throughout the year.
           Since the insurance liabilities are of a long-term nature, the actuarial methods and assumptions used to calculate
           the reported liabilities are based on considerations of future expenditures over the long term. As the determination
           of these liabilities requires assumptions about economic and other events that may occur many years in the future,
           which are based on best information as at the valuation date, a significant degree of professional judgement must
           be exercised in developing these assumptions. Accordingly, changes in conditions within one year of the financial
           statement date could require material change in recognized amounts in a subsequent period or periods.

           MATERIAL JUDGEMENTS AND ASSUMPTIONS
           Judgements involve selecting and calibrating appropriate actuarial methods, macroeconomic trends, industry
           products, data, and practices, loss emergence patterns and other inputs. Development of material assumptions are
           subject to measurement uncertainty with a high risk of adjustment of results in future reporting periods.
           Consequently, forward looking assumptions require significant judgement with respect to future economic or
           market conditions and/or events. Required changes are modeled into input assumptions only when they are
           indicative of established trends.
           The critical judgements, methodologies and assumptions used in valuation of insurance liabilities under IFRS 17,
           which are reviewed annually, are discussed below.
           Premium allocation approach
           WCB is eligible to apply the premium allocation approach (PAA) for the liability for remaining coverage (LRC)
           because the coverage period (i.e., contract boundary) for the group of contracts is one year.
           Core measurement requirements
           Application of the core IFRS 17 requirements for measuring the liability for incurred claims (LIC) and the LRC
           involves these methodologies and inputs:

                Future cash flows are estimated using a current, unbiased, entity-specific, and explicit actuarial best
                 estimate approach that is substantially consistent with the expected value of all probable outcomes.
                To reflect the time value of future cash flows, a discount rate curve derived from a market-consistent, risk-
                 free, and liquidity-adjusted yield curve for investment grade debt instruments with similar timing and risk
                 characteristics as WCB’s insurance liabilities is applied. WCB calibrates market variables to be consistent
                 with its current circumstances and/or expectations, and the timing and risk characteristics of its cash flows,
                 as appropriate
                For discussion of the methodology for deriving discount rate curves, see the section Time value of future
                 cash flows
                An explicit risk adjustment set at zero that reflects the compensation that WCB would require to accept or
                 bear non-financial (i.e., insurance) risk.
           For discussion of WCB’s view on insurance risk, see the section Risk adjustment.
           Measurement of the liability for remaining coverage
           The LRC, reflecting deferred or unearned revenue, represents the obligation to provide insurance service over the
           unexpired portion of the coverage period. The LRC increases as premiums are received over time and decreases as
           service obligations are fulfilled and recognized in insurance revenue during the period. The carrying amount of the



                                           WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                       - 70 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                121
Other Financial Information




           LRC is comprised of premiums received less amounts amortized to insurance revenue. The amortized amounts are
           based on expected premium receipts (including premiums that are expected to be received after year end when
           payroll is confirmed) rather than received premiums.
           Loss component of onerous contracts
           When the group of contracts is onerous, IFRS 17 requires immediate recognition of the issued contracts and the
           related loss in current insurance expense and in the loss component of LRC. Recognition of the loss does not change
           the amount of the future cash flows – it merely accelerates the timing of loss recognition from the subsequent
           period to the current period. Judgement is required in developing the methodology to select and calibrate the
           relevant inputs, and to estimate both the expected contract fulfilment costs and in quantifying the loss component
           of the LRC. The loss is measured as the difference between the fulfilment cash flows related to the remaining
           coverage of the group using the general model and the carrying amount of the liability for the remaining coverage
           using the premium allocation approach.

           MEASUREMENT METHODS AND ASSUMPTIONS
           Scope
           Estimates of future cash flows are required for measurement of the:

                Liability for incurred claims costs of current and past claims to be paid in future periods,
                Liability for remaining coverage of future service obligations arising from cash inflows of the current or past
                 periods, and
                Expected onerous contracts loss component of the LRC recognized in the current period.
           Basis of measurement
           Determination of future cash flows applies the actuarial best estimate technique where the actual or ultimate value
           has an equal likelihood of being greater or less than the estimated value. The best estimate, based on all
           information available at the valuation date and considering all likely scenarios including extreme events both
           favorable and unfavorable, therefore represents the median of the range of outcomes.
           Valuation assumptions consider both internal and external experience, validated against historical patterns and
           expected trends through periodic experience studies. Such studies may also lead to, or confirm, the judgement that
           a change in assumptions or methodology may be required for more reliable estimates.
           Techniques for estimating claims in pay and claims incurred but not reported at the reporting date are based on
           WCB’s judgement that historical claims experience is indicative of future claims development and their ultimate
           cost. Unusual or non-recurring experience, if not representative of current trends, is excluded or adjusted as
           required.
           Valuation methods
           For valuation purposes, future benefits are grouped into broad categories: benefits in-pay, outstanding claims, and
           long latency occupational diseases.
           Benefits in-pay are pensions that have already been awarded, with future payments projected on the basis of the
           mortality tables as well as other specific assumptions. The related liability is based on a cash flow projection of
           expected future payments for each benefit recipient at the valuation date, estimated by considering the amount
           currently received, the probability of the benefit remaining in force, demographic assumptions and characteristics
           of the benefits being valued.
           Outstanding claims refer to all other types of benefit payments for incurred claims, as well as costs related to future
           claims management. The general method used to determine the related liabilities typically involves analyzing the
           benefit costs over an experience period to establish average cost for each period after injury. These average costs,



                                            WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                        - 71 -




122                                                                                     Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                              Other Financial Information




           along with exposure indexes for each injury year, assumed rates of future escalation, and the survivorship
           probabilities where applicable, are used to calculate projected costs for each of the future years.
           The liability for long latency occupational diseases differs from liabilities for incurred claims, being driven by the
           number of expected claims arising from exposure to disease agents in each period multiplied by the average cost
           per occupational disease claim. Expected claim costs are allocated to underlying calendar years of exposure in
           considering the latency assumptions relevant to those periods.
           Overhead allocation
           Claims management expenses included in future cash flows reflect a systematic allocation of overhead expenses
           directly attributable to contract fulfilment. Administration salaries and expenses are allocated to claims
           management based on the level of functional activities of the business units involved in claims processing. The
           current level of expenses is taken as an appropriate baseline, adjusted for expected expense inflation, if required.
           See Note 16 Administration and Other Expense for details of total overhead allocated to claims management and to
           corporate administration.
           Time value of future cash flows
           The time value of future cash flows is reflected by discounting the related insurance liabilities to their present value.
           Discount rates under IFRS 17 must be derived using a yield curve with similar attributes and liquidity characteristics,
           risks, and maturities as its future cash flows. The methodology for deriving the curve may apply either the bottom-
           up approach that uses a risk-free yield curve plus a liquidity adjustment, or the top-down approach that uses a
           market-based yield curve adjusted for credit risk across the entire curve. Development of the discount rate
           assumption involves significant judgement and effort and has the greatest impact in the measurement of WCB’s
           insurance liabilities.
           Nominal discount rates
           WCB applies a hybrid approach for developing nominal discount rates, using the bottom-up approach for the risk-
           free yield curve that is adjusted by market-based liquidity premiums derived using the top-down approach, as
           discussed in the following section. Risk-free nominal discount rates are derived from a yield curve of observable
           risk-free debt instruments, primarily Bank of Canada bonds. The nominal rate curve is extrapolated from the last
           available market data point to an ultimate forward rate consistent with long-term real interest and inflation rate
           expectations.
           Liquidity adjustment
           Given limited ability to transfer or commute WCB’s insurance liabilities, an adjustment must be included in their
           valuation to quantify such illiquidity, achieved by adjusting risk-free nominal yields using a curve of market
           consistent liquidity premiums specific to each relevant maturity. WCB develops liquidity premiums using a top-down
           approach by comparing the spreads on investment grade corporate bonds with yields, where available, on Canada
           bonds with matching maturities. Using Canadian corporate BBB bonds as the asset reference portfolio, the liquidity
           adjustment is expressed as a fixed percentage of the reference portfolio spread over risk-free rates, plus an
           additional constant adjustment to account for WCB insurance contracts being more illiquid than the reference
           portfolio. The combined percentage across all maturities on the discount rate curve adjusts the discount rates to
           reflect the illiquidity of WCB’s insurance liabilities.
           Real discount rates
           The real discount rate curve is derived by applying an inflation adjustment across all maturities along the nominal
           rate curve. This adjustment reflects future inflation at maturity.




                                            WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                        - 72 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                   123
Other Financial Information




           The table below provides relevant forward discount and inflation rates as at the end of the current and prior
           periods:
                                                                                           F or w a r d R a t e s b y T e n or
                                                    Years      1          5        10        15        20        25        30    40   50   60   Ultimate
                                2 02 4
           Nominal discount rates                           3.77%      4.66% 5.51% 5.66% 5.30% 5.32% 5.27% 4.26% 3.88% 3.50% 4.43%

           Inflation rates                                  2.30%      2.34% 2.38% 2.04% 2.26% 2.51% 2.83% 2.63% 2.42% 2.21% 2.00%

                                 2023
           Nominal discount rates                           5.26%      4.13% 5.11% 5.38% 4.84% 4.60% 4.37% 4.35% 4.17% 3.99% 4.43%

           Inflation rates                                  2.80%      1.77% 2.10% 1.70% 1.49% 2.41% 2.48% 2.36% 2.24% 2.12% 2.00%


           E q u i v a l e nt s i n g l e r a t e           2 02 4     2023

           Equivalent single nominal discount rate          4.92%      4.75%
           Equivalent single inflation rate                 2.31%      2.04%
           Equivalent single real discount rate             2.55%      2.66%


           Risk adjustment
           WCB operates as a not-for-profit public sector monopoly founded on the principles of cost neutrality and collective
           liability. This model precludes inclusion of economic compensation for bearing risk with respect to both liability
           valuation and pricing.
           Application of the best estimate method for liability valuation is predicated on a related confidence level of 50%,
           representing the median of the range of outcomes. In this context, WCB is indifferent between the actual liability
           being higher or lower than the best estimate, which is consistent with an effective risk adjustment of zero and a
           confidence level of 50%.
           Inflation assumptions
           Claim costs for workers’ compensation are sensitive to long-term inflation. For estimating future cash flows, WCB
           establishes long-term economic assumptions for general inflation, wage escalation, and health care escalation by
           considering both external and internal historical trends and forward-looking economic and market indicators.
           Canada inflation
           Historical Canada inflation published by Statistics Canada is considered a market variable. WCB’s approach to
           determine market-consistent future inflation rates is based on the spread by maturity, as at a valuation date,
           between a Government of Canada nominal yield curve and a corresponding real yield curve, where the spreads are
           further adjusted for non-inflation components and lower liquidity for real return bonds compared to nominal
           bonds. An ultimate inflation rate can be derived as the mid-point or average of the medium-term target inflation
           range, currently between 1% - 3% per annum (around 2% per annum).
           Alberta inflation
           Over the past 10 years, Alberta inflation has generally aligned with Canada inflation. Accordingly, Alberta inflation is
           considered to be the same as the Canadian inflation derived in the previous section.
           Cost of living allowance
           The WCB assumption for the cost-of-living allowance (COLA) for indexed benefits is Alberta inflation plus a current
           adjustment of -0.45% per annum.




                                                      WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                  - 73 -




124                                                                                                 Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                             Other Financial Information




           Health care escalation
           Health care escalation is developed from analysis of WCB cost experience, also taking into consideration the results
           of external studies. This escalation rate represents general inflation plus excess escalation of 1.5%, covering both
           increases in utilization and in the costs for medical procedures and other therapeutic care.
           Wage growth
           Total wage growth is the increase in average wages comprising expected inflation and the net wage growth rate.
           WCB considers that a long-term rate for net wage growth at December 31, 2024 of 0.9% per annum to be
           appropriate for the period.
           Demographic assumptions
           Demographic assumptions relating to the claimant population include, among others, volumes and rates of claims
           occurrence, their duration and cost, type and/or severity of injury or illness, mortality (incidence of death),
           longevity (life expectancy), and morbidity (incidence and development of disability or disease). These assumptions
           are differentiated by claimant and/or survivor gender and age, injury or disease classification, and occupation
           among other factors. Demographic assumptions primarily affect healthcare costs and annuitized payments such as
           economic loss payments, disability pensions, survivor benefits, and long-term personal care.
           Mortality and longevity
           Mortality is defined as the rate at which death is expected to occur for a specified group, with the risk that death
           may occur sooner than expected. Conversely, longevity risk for a group arises when life expectancy is longer than
           expected. WCB uses mortality and longevity assumptions in estimating the duration of economic loss and survivor
           benefit payments, for both benefits in pay and outstanding claim liabilities. Assumptions are generally developed
           using a blend of national mortality data, industry trends, and WCB specific demographic data. Assumptions affecting
           claim termination are developed for each benefit type, incorporating recent experience and claimant
           characteristics. A reasonable allowance may also be included for improvements in workplace safety practices and
           healthcare and rehabilitation outcomes that affect mortality and longevity.
           Morbidity
           Morbidity assumptions are specific to types of injury or disease categories, affecting cost, duration, and probability
           of recurrence. Arising from incidence of injuries and disease for workplace risk exposures, morbidity is an
           assumption for long-term care, short-term disability, latent occupational disease, and healthcare and personal care
           costs related to such claims. Morbidity assumptions based on WCB experience as well as past and emerging
           industry experience are established for each type of morbidity and occupational/industry risk. Appropriate
           assumptions are made about future improvements in morbidity experience due to advances in medical practice and
           technology.
           See Note 14 Insurance Risk and Risk Management for details of the sensitivity of material assumptions on key
           results.

           EXPLANATION OF RECOGNIZED AMOUNTS
           Impact of contracts issued in the period
           Contracts issued during the reporting period represent the group of contracts for the subsequent coverage period
           because they were determined to be onerous and deemed to be issued when the renewal rates are publicly
           communicated at the end of the current period. Recognition of the renewal group of contracts impacts insurance
           expense, insurance service result, and the LRC of the current period.

           See the section Other insurance expense in Note 13 Insurance Revenue and Expenses for details of the amounts
           related to onerous contracts.




                                           WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                       - 74 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                125
Other Financial Information




           Changes in insurance liabilities
           After initial recognition and measurement of insurance contracts, the carrying value of the related insurance
           liabilities at the reporting date comprises the LIC and the LRC, which is determined by underlying movements in
           premiums receipts, release of service obligations and the change in the loss component.
           IFRS 17 prescribes a current estimate of the LIC for each reporting period, which entails updates to future cash
           flows to reflect changes in market and demographic judgements, assumptions or actuarial methods since the
           previous valuation. Specifically, such remeasurement considers new information about claims experience and their
           future development; changes in actuarial valuation methods and assumptions arising from claim experience; and/or
           legislation, tribunal decisions, or policy amendments that may affect entitlement to benefits, their type and
           duration, and in some cases, with retrospective effect.
           Reconciliation of insurance liabilities
           The tables below provide a reconciliation of the changes in insurance liabilities for the current and comparative
           periods.
                                                                                                                                                            Liability for
                                                                                                               LRC excl loss             LRC loss                                  Liability for
                                                                                                   Notes                                                    remaining                                 2024
                                                                                                               component               component                                incurred claims
           ($ thousands)                                                                                                                                     coverage

           In s u r a n c e l i a b i l i t i e s , b e g i n n i n g o f y e a r                          $        (55,742)       $      216,700       $       160,958         $ 13,413,100       $ 13,574,058


           St a t e m e nt of f i na nc i a l p e r f or m a n c e a n d
           c om pr e he n si ve i nc om e
           In s u r a n c e m a n a g e m e n t
                Insurance revenue                                                                    13         (1,539,382)                         -       (1,539,382)                        -     (1,539,382)
                Insurance expense                                                                    13
                     Provision for future costs of current year claims                                                         -                    -                       -       1,413,400         1,413,400
                     Current year claims and other expenses                                                                    -                    -                       -         331,091           331,091
                     Remeasurement of insurance liabilities                                                                    -                    -                       -         179,588           179,588
                     Reversal of onerous contracts                                                                             -           (16,900)             (16,900)                       -        (16,900)
                Insurance expense                                                                                              -           (16,900)              (16,900)           1,924,079         1,907,179
           In s u r a n c e m a n a g e m e n t r e s u l t                                                     (1,539,382)                (16,900)         (1,556,282)             1,924,079           367,797
           In s u r a n c e f i n a n c e i n c o m e a n d e x p e n s e
                Interest on insurance liabilities                                                    15                        -                    -                       -         671,300           671,300
                Effect of changes in financial assumptions on insurance
                                                                                                     15                        -                    -                       -         172,200           172,200
                liabilities
           Fin a nc i a l m a na g e m e nt r e sul t                                                                          -                    -                       -         843,500           843,500


                                                                                                                (1,539,382)                (16,900)         (1,556,282)             2,767,579         1,211,297
           Re c e i p t s a n d di sb u r se m e n t s
           Premiums received                                                                                     1,536,957                          -        1,536,957                         -      1,536,957
           Claims and other insurance expenses paid
                Payments for current year injuries                                                                             -                    -                       -        (331,091)         (331,091)
                Payments for prior years' injuries                                                                             -                    -                       -      (1,382,988)       (1,382,988)
                                                                                                                 1,536,957                          -        1,536,957             (1,714,079)         (177,122)
           In s u r a n c e l i a b i l i t i e s , e n d o f y e a r                                      $        (58,167)       $      199,800       $       141,633         $ 14,466,600       $ 14,608,233




                                                                                    WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                                                   - 75 -




126                                                                                                                                       Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                                                                                                       Other Financial Information




           ($ thousands)                                                                                                                                Liability for
                                                                                                            LRC excl loss            LRC loss                                 Liability for
                                                                                                   Notes                                                 remaining                               2023
                                                                                                             component              component                               incurred claims
                                                                                                                                                          coverage

           In s u r a n c e l i a b i l i t i e s , b e g i n n i n g o f y e a r                          $     (71,526)       $      242,800      $       171,274         $ 12,199,700      $ 12,370,974


           St a t e m e nt of f i na nc i a l p e r f or m a n c e a n d
           c om pr e he n si ve i nc om e
           In s u r a n c e m a n a g e m e n t
                Insurance revenue                                                                    13        (1,353,301)                      -        (1,353,301)                      -     (1,353,301)
                Insurance expense                                                                    13
                     Provision for future costs of current year claims                                                      -                   -                       -       1,282,400        1,282,400
                     Current year claims and other expenses                                                                 -                   -                       -         314,077          314,077
                     Remeasurement of insurance liabilities                                                                 -                   -                       -         938,081          938,081
                     Reversal of onerous contracts                                                                          -          (26,100)              (26,100)                     -        (26,100)
                Insurance expense                                                                                           -          (26,100)              (26,100)           2,534,558        2,508,458
           In s u r a n c e m a n a g e m e n t r e s u l t                                                    (1,353,301)             (26,100)          (1,379,401)            2,534,558        1,155,157
           In s u r a n c e f i n a n c e i n c o m e a n d e x p e n s e
                Interest on insurance liabilities                                                    15                     -                   -                       -         532,400          532,400
                Effect of changes in financial assumptions on insurance
                                                                                                     15                     -                   -                       -        (196,200)        (196,200)
                liabilities
           Fin a nc i a l m a na g e m e nt r e sul t                                                                       -                   -                       -         336,200          336,200


                                                                                                               (1,353,301)             (26,100)          (1,379,401)            2,870,758        1,491,357


           Re c e i p t s a n d di sb u r se m e n t s
           Premiums received                                                                                   1,369,085                        -         1,369,085                       -      1,369,085
           Claims and other insurance expenses paid
                Payments for current year injuries                                                                          -                   -                       -        (314,077)        (314,077)
                Payments for prior years' injuries                                                                          -                   -                       -      (1,343,281)      (1,343,281)
                                                                                                               1,369,085                        -         1,369,085            (1,657,358)        (288,273)
           In s u r a n c e l i a b i l i t i e s , e n d o f y e a r                                      $     (55,742)       $      216,700      $       160,958         $ 13,413,100      $ 13,574,058




                                                                                    WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                                                 - 76 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                                                                                              127
Other Financial Information




       13. INSURANCE REVENUE AND EXPENSES

           ACCOUNTING POLICY
           Insurance premiums comprise only those rate components directly attributable to risk underwriting and claims
           fulfilment. Premiums are assessed and due when employers report their assessable earnings for the current year.
           For employers who have not reported, premiums are estimated and included in insurance revenue.
           Premium receipts are recorded in the LRC based on assessed premiums as a measurement proxy for future
           service obligations. Non-insurance related premiums assessments are also levied to fund statutory funding
           commitments.
           Insurance revenue is recognized in the Statement of Financial Performance and Comprehensive Income based on
           the passage of time over the coverage period of the group of contracts. As WCB provides insurance contract
           services it reduces the LRC and recognizes insurance revenue. The amount of insurance revenue recognized
           depicts the transfer of promised services at an amount that reflects the portion of consideration that WCB
           expects to be entitled to in exchange for those services. Insurance revenue includes an accrual for estimated
           premiums for yet to be reported assessable earnings of the period.
           Insurance expense is recognized in the Statement of Financial Performance and Comprehensive Income as costs
           for current year claims are incurred and as exposures to long-latency workplace disease or injury agents occur
           over time.
           Insurance expense comprises the following:

                Cost of current year claims comprising payments made on current year claims
                Provisions for future costs of current year claims, occupational disease exposures, and claims
                 management expenses
                Onerous contract losses recognized in insurance expense when fact and circumstances indicate that the
                 contract is onerous and future cash flows are expected to be a net outflow. The portion of the expected
                 loss related to future coverage, if any, is deferred as the loss component of the LRC. In the subsequent
                 period when the expected loss is realized as claim obligations are fulfilled, the loss component is reversed
                 as an offsetting credit to insurance expense
                Remeasurement of the liability for incurred claims resulting in gains and losses arising from differences
                 between actual and expected claims experience from the previous valuation, changes in actuarial
                 methods and assumptions, or changes in policy or legislation.


           PREMIUMS
           Under the Act, premiums are assessable at the effective date of coverage, i.e., the beginning of the calendar year.
           The assessed amount due is based on employers’ reported estimate of their annual or quarterly assessable
           earnings. At the end of the period, premiums also include estimated assessments of $7,667.0 (2023 - $7,545.1) for
           yet to be reported assessable earnings for the coverage period. The premium accrual is determined using a
           statistical model to estimate the amount of unreported assessable earnings, based on actual returns processed to
           date and historical patterns of processed to unprocessed returns and the ratio of estimated to actual payrolls at a
           specified point in time. Any difference between estimated and assessed premiums is adjusted when final assessable
           earnings are reported in the following period.




                                          WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                      - 77 -




128                                                                                   Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                                                       Other Financial Information




           Premium components
           Assessments required to fund claim and administrative costs as well as statutory funding commitments for the
           coverage period include the following premium components:
           Safety rebates
           Partnerships in injury reduction program (PIR), is a voluntary program that pays safety rebates to registered
           employers that have met the eligibility requirements in achieving certain workplace safety targets as specified
           under the program. Earned rebates are payable in the following year. The estimated rebate amount is based on
           several factors, including premiums paid, year-over-year improvement in claim experience and safety performance
           relative to industry benchmarks, among others. See Note 19(c) Safety Rebates for supplemental information on the
           Partnerships in Injury Reduction rebates.
           Injury reduction recovery from premiums
           In addition to insurance coverage, gross assessments include statutory funding for external organizations
           responsible for workplace injury reduction (i.e., Occupational Health and Safety, industry safety associations). These
           non-insurance assessments are segregated from insurance revenue because they are statutory levies to fund the
           operating costs of those organizations. The assessed amounts and related expenses are presented on a net basis
           under administration and other expense on the Statement of Financial Performance and Comprehensive Income as
           WCB is an agent of the program.
           Premiums for insurance coverage
           Insurance premiums cover payments for current year claims for future costs of current year claims, and provisions
           for future claims management expenses and long latency occupational injury and disease exposures. Funding of
           operating costs under the Act (i.e., corporate administration) is also included. Premiums for insurance coverage
           represents assessments net of non-insurance components.
           See the table below for a breakdown of the premium components that insurance revenue is derived from.

           ($ thousands)                                                                                              2024                  2023
              Gross assessments                                                                               $           1,711,606    $      1,504,715
              Safety rebates                                                                                              (103,413)             (84,924)
                 Net assessments                                                                                          1,608,193           1,419,791


              Other assessments                                                                                              9,873                 8,282
              Deduct: Injury reduction recovery from premiums                                                               (78,684)            (74,772)
           P r e m i um s f or i ns ur a nc e c ov e r a g e                                                  $           1,539,382    $      1,353,301

           For a distribution of premiums by industry classification, see Concentration of Risk in Note 14 Insurance Risk and
           Risk Management.

           INSURANCE REVENUE
           Assessed insurance premiums recorded in the liability for remaining coverage substantively represents deferred
           insurance revenue. WCB concluded that passage of time best represents the pattern of earned revenue recognition
           because its exposure to risk does not change proportionately as liability is released through incurrence and
           settlement of claims. Instead, insurance revenue is recognized through straight-line release of the liability for
           remaining coverage as insurance service obligations are fulfilled evenly over the coverage period. At the end of the
           coverage period, the liability for remaining coverage is adjusted to include all finalized premiums and provisional
           assessments, with the final balance being fully amortized to insurance revenue.




                                                        WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                    - 78 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                                           129
Other Financial Information




           For discussion of how insurance premiums are recognized in revenue, see the sections Changes in the liability for
           remaining coverage under Explanation of recognized amounts in Note 12 Insurance Contracts, as well as the section
           Reconciliation of insurance liabilities for details of how insurance premiums flow through the liability for remaining
           coverage and subsequently released to insurance revenue.

           INSURANCE EXPENSE
           Cost of current year claims
           The table below provides details of the cost of current year claims reported in insurance expense:
                                                                                                 Current Year              Prior Years'
           ($ thousands)                                                                                                                               2 02 4                   2023
                                                                                                   Injuries                  Injuries
               Claims expense
                  Provision for future costs of current year injuries and
                                                                                                 $    1,413,400          $                 -     $     1,413,400          $    1,282,400
                  exposures1

                  Claim payments processed in the year
                      Short-term disability                                                              118,362                 304,967                 423,329                  442,999
                      Long-term disability                                                                  3,039                407,967                 411,006                  352,425
                      Survivor benefits                                                                     6,715                 54,518                  61,233                   56,881
                      Health care                                                                        148,297                 325,205                 473,502                  459,720
                      Re-employment services                                                                1,993                159,452                 161,445                  171,295
                                                                                                         278,406               1,252,109               1,530,515               1,483,320
           Claim payments related to prior years2                                                                  -         (1,382,988)              (1,382,988)             (1,343,281)
                                                                                                         278,406                (130,879)                147,527                  140,039
                                                                                                      1,691,806                 (130,879)              1,560,927               1,422,439
                                                              3
               C l a i m s m a n a g e m e n t e x pe n s e
                   Claims-related administration                                                           52,667                112,953                 165,620                  156,981
                  Appeals Commission                                                                            18                 17,926                  17,944                  17,057
                                                                                                           52,685                130,879                 183,564                  174,038
                                                                                                 $    1,744,491          $                 -     $     1,744,491          $    1,596,477


           1
               Provision for future costs of current year injuries and exposures represents the present value of all future obligations for benefit payments arising from current year injuries and
               occupational disease exposures.
           2
               Although claim payments relating to prior years injuries are processed in the reporting period, they are not expensed in the current year but are charged to the liabilities
               established for prior accident years.
           3
               Claims management represents WCB’s internal functional costs related to claims processing as well as funding of the external decision review body. See Note 16 Administration
               and Other Expense, for a breakdown by nature of expenses related to Claims-related administration.



           Other insurance expense
           Insurance expense also includes remeasurement of insurance liabilities (excluding discount rate changes) of $179.6
           million (2023 - $938.1 million) and the net change in onerous contracts losses of $16.9 million (2023 - $26.1 million),
           comprising the loss recognized in the period of $199.8 million (2023 - $216.7 million) and reversal of the loss of the
           prior period of $216.7 million (2023 - $242.8 million).
           The rate setting deficiency for the 2025 premium year resulted in recognition of an onerous contract loss for the
           period of $199.8 million (2023 - $216.7 million). With reversal of the prior year loss, the net change in the onerous
           contract loss recognized in insurance expense for the period was a decrease of $16.9 million (2023 decrease of
           $26.1 million). See the section Loss component of onerous contracts in Note 12 Insurance Contracts for additional
           information.




                                                                  WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                                  - 79 -




130                                                                                                                    Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                                                                  Other Financial Information




           Changes in the liability for incurred claims
           The change of the real discount rate curve used for this valuation, with an equivalent single real discount rate of
           2.55% (2023 - 2.66%) per annum, resulted in an increase in the liability of $172.2 million.
           See the section Measurement methods and assumptions in Note 12 Insurance Contracts for discussion of the rate
           methodology and the respective rate curves.
           The effect of the change in financial assumptions, primarily inflation and discount rates, is presented separately
           from other remeasurement changes.
           In 2024, there were several changes made to the actuarial assumptions and methods for December 31, 2024
           valuation versus those used for the previous valuation. For December 31, 2024 valuation, updates were made to
           the assumptions used to value liabilities for mortality, short term wage loss and re-employment services, home
           maintenance and housekeeping allowances, and net wage growth. These changes to actuarial basis caused
           liabilities for incurred claims to decrease by $128.8 million (2023 - $305.0 million increase).
           For 2024, experience losses on prior years’ claims and exposures amounted to $308.4 million (2023 - $633.1
           million). This loss was primarily driven by higher-than-expected new economic loss payment awards in 2024, along
           with higher claim costs from short-term wage loss benefits, offset by reductions in personal care allowances and
           home maintenance and housekeeping allowances.
           There were no changes in legislation or policy effective in 2024 that impacted the valuation of insurance liabilities.
           The table below provides details of the remeasurement changes in the LIC along with their corresponding
           presentation in the Statement of Financial Performance and Comprehensive Income for the reporting period.

           ($ thousands)                                                                                                            2024              2023
           C h a n g e i n i n f l a t i o n a n d r e a l d i s c o u n t r a t e f r o m p r i o r p e r i od                 $      172,200    $     (196,200)


           R e m e a s ur e m e nt of i ns ur a nc e l i a bi l i ti e s ( e x c l udi ng di s c oun t r a t e c ha n g e s )
               C h a n g e s i n v a l u a t i o n m e t ho d s a n d a s s u m p t i o n s
                  Mortality                                                                                                           (389,000)                 -
                  Short-term wage loss and re-employment services                                                                      379,900                  -
                  Home maintenance and housekeeping allowances                                                                         (65,600)                 -
                  Net wage growth                                                                                                      (54,100)                 -
                  Personal care allowances                                                                                                  -            284,200
                  Economic loss payments                                                                                                    -             50,300
                  Non-economic loss payments                                                                                                -            (29,500)
                                                                                                                                      (128,800)          305,000

               C ha ng e s i n c l a i m s e x pe r i e nc e
                  Economic loss payments                                                                                               366,400           505,900
                  Personal care allowances                                                                                             (81,100)                 -
                  Short-term wage loss benefits                                                                                         51,700           121,400
                  Home maintenance and housekeeping allowances                                                                         (50,900)                 -
                  Other experience losses (gains)                                                                                       22,288               5,781
                                                                                                                                       308,388           633,081
           R e m e a s ur e m e nt of i ns ur a nc e l i a bi l i ti e s ( e x c l udi ng di s c oun t r a t e c ha n g e s )          179,588           938,081

           P r e s e nt e d i n th e s t a t e m e nt of f i na nc i a l pe r f or m a nc e a n d c om pr e he ns i c e
           i nc o m e a s:
           Effect of inflation and discount rate changes on liabilities                                                                172,200          (196,200)
           Remeasurement of insurance liabilities (excluding discount rate changes)                                                    179,588           938,081
                                                                                                                                $      351,788    $      741,881




                                                                  WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                                        - 80 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                                                     131
Other Financial Information




       14. INSURANCE RISK AND RISK MANAGEMENT
           Nature and extent of insurance risks
           Insurance risk encompasses the possible occurrence of insured events, the unpredictability of related claims
           development and the amount of the ultimate loss. Insured events are inherently random, with the actual number of
           claims and benefits varying from the estimated timing, volume, severity, and duration of those claims, among other
           factors. Consequently, these factors result in high measurement uncertainty in establishing liabilities for incurred
           claims and for sufficient pricing of coverage. For a portfolio of insurance contracts, the principal actuarial risk is that
           actual experience will emerge differently than expected, leading to losses exceeding the carrying amount in the
           liabilities.
           Insurance risk for public workers’ compensation systems differs materially from underwriting risk in competitive
           commercial markets. Unlike commercial policies with clearly specified insured risks and liability limits, risks for these
           insurance programs arise from broad principles-based rights and obligations established by legislation, regulations,
           and tribunal decisions, as well as from WCB’s interpretation and application of legislated objectives. From time to
           time, amendments to WCB legislation may also substantively redefine the scope, nature, and magnitude of
           statutory rights and obligations, significantly increasing the complexity and uncertainty in revenue and liability
           measurement.
           Concentration of risk
           WCB is exposed to concentration risk because it operates exclusively in Alberta, which precludes broad
           diversification of insurance risk across geographic regions, industries, and populations. WCB’s insurance risk
           exposures are highly concentrated in the construction and public sectors, with associated exposures to seasonality
           and economic cyclicality, and large covered worker populations.
           The table below shows WCB’s economic exposure to insurance contract risk by industry sector, using current year
           assessed premiums as an indicator of sectoral risk concentration:

           Year ended December 31, 2024                                            C u r r e n t y e a r a s s e s s e d pr e m i u m s

           ($ thousands)                                      2024                     % of total                        2023             % of total

           Se c tor c l a ss i f i c a ti o n
              Agriculture                              $            30,939                1.8%                 $                28,997       1.9%
              Business Services                                    134,447                7.9%                                 115,720       7.7%
              Construction                                         414,824               24.2%                                 376,981      25.1%
              Manufacturing                                        163,164                9.5%                                 147,867       9.8%
              Mining, Oil and Gas                                  116,625                6.8%                                 112,069       7.5%
              Municipalities, Education, Health                    379,464               22.2%                                 308,807      20.5%
              Provincial Government                                 34,474                2.0%                                  25,223       1.7%
              Trade                                                232,223               13.6%                                 202,004      13.4%
              Transportation                                       205,446               12.0%                                 186,883      12.4%
              Other                                                     -                0.0%                                     164       0.0%
                                                       $        1,711,606               100.0%                 $            1,504,715      100.0%

           Sensitivity of material assumptions
           In determining insurance liabilities, the primary material assumptions are assumptions on escalation rates and
           nominal discount rates. The general inflation assumption impacts all future cash flow estimates, given its correlation
           to wage growth, and health care escalation rates. Wage growth assumption is used to value insurance liabilities for
           benefits such as re-employment services and personal care and housekeeping allowances. Health care escalation
           assumption affects the insurance liabilities for health care benefits. Mortality and longevity are also significant
           assumptions, but it is difficult to isolate the impact and therefore, sensitivity disclosure has not been provided.



                                                  WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                              - 81 -




132                                                                                             Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                                                                                       Other Financial Information




           Methodologies for quantifying sensitivities
           WCB establishes assumptions on the discount rates and general inflation rates for all future years based on market
           data as at the valuation date. Assumptions on wage growth and health care escalation are set by adding 0.9% and
           1.5% respectively to the general inflation assumption.
           Sensitivity analyses are prepared by replacing the assumption in a valuation model with a test assumption while
           holding all others constant. The difference between the two outputs represents the hypothetical effect of the
           change in assumptions on specific results.
           The following sensitivity analyses show the impacts on key results for reasonably possible movements in the
           specified material assumptions:

                                                                                           E f f e c t s o f a s s u m p ti o n c h a n g e s o n k e y r e s ul t s

                                                                                         20 24                                                                2023
                                                                 Si ng l e                                                           S i ng l e
               ($ millions)                                   e qu i v a l e n t              F un d B a l a n c e                e q u i v a l e nt              Fund B a l a nc e
                                                                  r a te                                                               r a te
                                                                                            +1.00%                   -1.00%                                      +1.00%               -1.00%
               E c o n om i c a s s u m p t i o ns
                   General inflation1                             2.31%             $     (2,047.3)         $ 1,654.70                      2.04%         $    (2,018.5)     $ 1,615.90
                   Real wage growth2                              0.90%                     (782.0)              607.7                      1.00%                (826.0)          631.8
                   Real health care escalation3                   1.50%                     (294.1)                  236.0                  1.50%                (275.3)              220.3
               F i na n c i a l a s s um p t i on s
                   Nominal discount rate4,5                       4.92%                  $1,600.9           $    (2,010.2)                  4.75%             $1,552.7      $    (1,965.0)
           1
               General inflation is the core indicator underlying all economic assumptions.
           2
               Real wage growth represents growth in excess of general inflation.
           3
               Real health care escalation represents escalation in excess of general inflation.
           4
               Nominal discount rate comprises risk-free bond yield curve adjusted by an illiquidity factor for all tenors.
           5
               Note 7 Investment Risk Management discusses interest rate risk on fixed income pool investments. After considering the investments, the net impact to fund balance of a +1.00%
               change in interest rates is $1,250.3 million and a -1.00% change in interest rates is $1,659.6 million.




                                                                 WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                                   - 82 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                                                                               133
Other Financial Information




           CLAIMS DEVELOPMENT
           The table that follows presents the development of the estimated ultimate cost of claims and related claim
           payments for accident years 2015 - 2024. The top part of the table illustrates how the estimate of total cash flows
           for each accident year has changed with increased experience over successive valuations. The shaded claims
           triangle shows the estimated cost of claims for an accident year in the year of the accident, one year after the year
           of the accident, two years after the year of the accident, etc., and compares the total estimated cost to the actual
           cumulative payments over the development period. Due to the decades-long duration of certain WCB benefit types,
           significant amounts may be paid out in the distant future beyond the valuation date. The bottom part of the table
           reconciles the total outstanding benefits amount, including provisions that do not require payments, to the
           discounted amount of the LIC. Further detail of the LIC can be seen in the section Reconciliation of insurance
           liabilities in Note 12 Insurance Contracts.
                                                 1
           C l a i m s D e v e l op m e n t
           as at December 31, 2024
                                                                                   Pr ior
           ($ millions)                                                            Y ea rs      2015      20 1 6    2017         2018        2019       2020        2021       20 2 2     2 0 23      20 2 4         T ot a l

               E st i m a t e of c u m u l a t i v e c l a i m s b e n e f i t s
                   At end of accident year                                                      1,421.3   1,323.9   1,471.6       1,714.5    1,952.8    1,842.3     1,928.5    2,174.4     2,455.4     2,718.9
                   One year later                                                               1,353.1   1,427.1   1,644.2       1,819.2    1,924.4    1,878.7     2,037.4    2,397.9     2,545.2
                   Two years later                                                              1,516.5   1,550.3   1,781.5       1,822.9    2,001.9    2,009.4     2,248.2    2,535.2
                   Three years later                                                            1,648.0   1,632.2   1,762.9       1,919.1    2,151.4    2,297.4     2,404.3
                   Four years later                                                             1,719.7   1,590.4   1,831.6       2,088.1    2,432.1    2,521.0
                   Five years later                                                             1,660.2   1,606.0   1,944.5       2,340.6    2,640.5
                   Six years later                                                              1,700.2   1,685.1   2,092.3       2,551.1
                   Seven years later                                                            1,739.8   1,791.6   2,217.2
                   Eight years later                                                            1,840.1   1,847.0
                   Nine years later                                                             1,853.1

               C u r r e n t e st i m a t e o f c u m u l a t i ve c l a i m s b e n e f i t s 1,853.1  1,847.0     2,217.2       2,551.1    2,640.5    2,521.0     2,404.3    2,535.2     2,545.2     2,718.9
               C u m u l a t i v e p a y m e nt s                                               (732.1)  (704.9)     (839.9)       (945.1)    (949.2)    (816.6)     (735.8)    (663.6)     (519.6)     (278.4)
               O u t st a n d i n g b e ne f i t s
                   Undiscounted                                                  $ 9,922.6 $ 1,121.0 $ 1,142.1 $    1,377.3 $     1,606.0 $ 1,691.3 $   1,704.4 $   1,668.5 $ 1,871.6 $ 2,025.6 $ 2,440.5 $ 26,570.9
                   Effect of discounting                                             (5,193.3)  (649.4)  (654.7)     (772.4)       (898.6)   (935.3)     (910.3)     (865.9)   (952.5)  (1,010.6) (1,138.2) (13,981.2)
                                                                                      4,729.3    471.6    487.4       604.9         707.4     756.0       794.1       802.6     919.1    1,015.0   1,302.3   12,589.7
               C l a i m s m a na g e m e nt
                   Undiscounted                                                                                                                                                                                        1,533.5
                   Effect of discounting                                                                                                                                                                                (723.4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         810.1
               L a t e n t o c c u p a t i o n a l d i se a s e s
                  Undiscounted                                                                                                                                                                                         3,279.8
                  Effect of discounting                                                                                                                                                                               (2,213.0)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1,066.8
            T ot a l c la i m be ne fi t s
               Undiscounted                                                                                                                                                                                           31,384.2
               Effect of discounting                                                                                                                                                                                 (16,917.6)
           L ia bi li t y for inc ur r e d c l a i m s                                                                                                                                                            $ 1 4 ,46 6 .6


           1
               Claims management and latent occupational diseases are excluded from the claims development triangles because they are provisions only without direct cash flows.



           Risk management
           Effective management of insurance risk is critical to sustaining WCB’s fiscal capacity over the long term, through
           activities such as identifying, evaluating, and implementing proactive loss control, trend monitoring, and mitigation
           strategies. The following discussions cover the major functional areas of focus in insurance related risk
           management.
           Insurance risk
           To minimize the risks of complex claim resolution and resulting cost escalation, WCB implemented a claimant-
           centric and multi-disciplinary, technology supported case management process aligned with WCB’s statutory
           mandate and service commitments. This integrated process relies on proven business practices to ensure that
           claims are accepted and processed in a timely manner to accomplish effective return-to-work outcomes. Effective
           claims management is a function of ongoing review of current and historical claims performance, predictive data
           analytics to help monitor claims experience, proactive interventions in high-risk claims, and planning for future
           enhancements in claims processing.




                                                                                             WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                                                               - 83 -




134                                                                                                                                              Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                                        Other Financial Information




           Solvency risk
           WCB’s asset liability management (ALM) framework that drives execution of funding policy is designed to safeguard
           financial sustainability of the Accident Fund over the long run. The primary objective of ALM is to ensure that the
           compensation system is fully funded while meeting investment return targets at a prudent level of risk. This is
           achieved by positioning the investment portfolio to deliver sustainable returns, liquidity, and diversification over a
           wide range of asset classes, capital markets and risk profiles. Targets are established through frequent ALM studies
           that model a broad and diverse set of scenarios for both macroeconomic conditions and WCB-specific business and
           funding strategies. ALM outputs enable investment management to align the maturity and risk characteristics of
           future cash flows for both assets and liabilities, as well as critical insights and recommendations for funding strategy
           and its execution. The intent is not to perfectly match asset and liability cash flows but to facilitate an integrated
           approach in making investment and funding decisions.
           Maturity analysis of liability cash flows
           The following table summarizes the maturity profile of WCB’s insurance liabilities as at December 31, 2024 based
           on the future cash flows expected to be paid out in the periods presented. Because a significant amount of WCB’s
           investments is held in pools that are reasonably liquid, a maturity analysis for financial assets corresponding to the
           maturity profile of insurance liabilities is not required because those assets do not directly service the liabilities.
           Moreover, investment cash flows are not meaningfully comparable to liability cash flows because of the mismatch
           between their respective holding objectives and risk characteristics.
                                                                                                                              Total future
                                            Up to 1                                                             6 years and
           ($ millions)                                   2 years       3 years        4years         5 years                    claim
                                             year                                                                 beyond
                                                                                                                               payments

                          2024
            Estimated future cash flows    $ 1,436.9 $ 1,162.0 $ 1,056.6 $                979.4 $        926.8 $ 25,822.5     $ 31,384.2
                  (undiscounted)                4.6%      3.7%      3.4%                   3.1%           3.0%      82.2%         100.0%



                          2023
            Estimated future cash flows    $ 1,342.1 $ 1,052.8 $            938.1 $       858.3 $        801.8 $ 23,801.4     $ 28,794.5
                  (undiscounted)                4.7%      3.6%               3.2%          3.0%           2.8%      82.7%         100.0%


           Investment and financial risk
           Other than the time value of money reflected in estimates of future cash flows, WCB has no direct exposure to
           financial risk from insurance contracts because those cash flows are not contractually linked to an underlying pool
           of financial assets exposed to market risks. WCB’s exposure to financial risk arising from its investment portfolio is
           indirect because it holds pools exclusively. WCB’s overall investment risk is professionally managed by AIMCo within
           a robust investment management framework closely aligned with WCB’s investment policy and guidelines.
           See Note 7 Investment Risk Management for details of financial risk exposures and investment portfolio related risk
           management.
           Credit risk
           Premiums receivable from employers have credit risk, which vary based on employer-specific factors, industry
           conditions, and macroeconomic or other factors. Their credit risk is largely subject to the economic circumstances
           they face and general economic conditions of the province.
           Credit risk associated with premium receivables related to employers is mitigated through risk management policies
           and procedures, which include close monitoring of premium payment status and follow-up measures with the
           employer. Premiums receivable are written off when there is no reasonable expectation of recovery. However, WCB
           continues to pursue enforcement activity to collect the amounts due.


                                            WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                        - 84 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                             135
Other Financial Information




       15. INSURANCE FINANCE INCOME AND EXPENSE

           ACCOUNTING POLICY
           Time value of money is incorporated into measurement of future cash flows by discounting them to their present
           value.
           Insurance finance income and expense represents the incremental return or cost for holding an insurance asset or
           liability for a specified period.
           Interest (or accretion) expense arises from unwinding or reversing the effects of discounting a future liability. The
           expense, which represents the amount applicable to the current period to increase the discounted liability to its
           future value at the end of the period, is recorded in insurance finance income and expense.
           The effect of changes in financial assumptions arising from remeasurement of an insurance asset or liability is also
           recorded in insurance finance income and expense in the period that such remeasurement occurs.
           WCB includes insurance finance income and expenses for the period in profit or loss on the Statement of Financial
           Performance and Comprehensive Income.


           Investment returns and insurance finance income and expense
           The Act mandates that the Accident Fund hold sufficient assets to fund future payments of all claim obligations but
           does not explicitly specify a contractual linkage to the cash flows of the investment portfolio. Consequently, there is
           no direct relationship between investment returns and insurance finance income and expense because investment
           cash flows are not used for contract measurement. Although investment returns directly fund the payment of
           claims, the underlying measurement impacts arising from financial risks are within the scope of IFRS 9 rather than
           IFRS 17.
           Insurance finance income and expense
           Insurance interest for the period of $671.3 million (2023 - $532.4 million) is determined by applying the nominal
           discount rate of 5.26% (2023 - 5.08%), representing the year 1 rate from the prior year discount rate curve applied
           to the average liability for incurred claims over the coverage period.
           Changes in financial assumptions
           The primary drivers of changes in financial assumptions are macroeconomic conditions directly affecting yields on
           debt securities on which the discount rate curve for liability measurement is based. The effect of remeasuring
           future cash flows in the current period using the 2024 rate curve was a $172.2 million loss (2023 - $196.2 million
           gain), reflecting a change in the single equivalent real discount rate from 2.66% in 2023 to 2.55% in 2024.
           For further details on the discount rate curve used to discount insurance liabilities can be found in the section Real
           discount rates in Note 12 Insurance Contracts.




                                            WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                        - 85 -




136                                                                                     Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                                                               Other Financial Information




       16. ADMINISTRATION AND OTHER EXPENSE
           Administration
           WCB’s total administration expenses are classified into two major groups based on their primary business functions:
           Claims-related administration
           This group is responsible for insurance operations including adjudicating claims, processing benefit payments,
           providing rehabilitation and re-employment services and other administrative functions related to claims
           management. Since these costs are directly attributable to claims fulfilment, the current year amounts are included
           in insurance expense. Future cash flows for claims administration arising from current year claims are included in
           the provision for future costs of current year injuries and exposures.
           Corporate administration
           This group is responsible for general and support services for the organization, including finance, human resources,
           legal, technology and executive management.
           Funding of operating costs
           In addition to the fully funded cost of expected claims and claims management for the period, legislation permits
           WCB to assess premiums to cover the all-inclusive operating costs of the Accident Fund, primarily claim and
           corporate administration. These operating requirements are incorporated into premium rates.
           The table below presents administration expenses broken down by nature of expense and functional purpose:

                                                                            Claims-related              Corporate
           ($ thousands)                                                                                                       20 24                 2023
                                                                            administration            administration


               Ad m i ni s tr a ti on e x pe nse s
                  Salaries and employee benefits                          $           179,979         $       71,067     $        251,046       $      236,028
                  Technology                                                              18,008              16,423               34,431               25,739
                  Office                                                                   2,172                1,806                  3,978                3,621
                  Occupancy                                                                6,075                3,756                  9,831                8,616
                  Professional fees                                                        3,030                2,152                  5,182                5,015
                  Other                                                                     885                 1,279                  2,164                2,419
                                                                                      210,149                 96,483              306,632              281,438
                  Depreciation and amortization                                        14,164                 10,314               24,478               23,728
                                                                                      224,313                106,797              331,110              305,166
               L ess
                  Recovery of costs from third parties                                    15,157                  49               15,206               12,074

               R e c l a s si f i c a ti ons
                  Claims expense – re-employment services                                 43,536                   -               43,536               39,687
                                                            1
                  Investment management expense                                                -               1,148                1,148                1,290
                                                                                          58,693               1,197               59,890               53,051
                                                                          $           165,620         $      105,600     $        271,220       $      252,115

           1
                Internal administration costs charged to investment management expense.




                                                             WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                             - 86 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                                                    137
Other Financial Information




       17. RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
           GOVERNMENT OF ALBERTA AND RELATED ENTITIES
           WCB has transactions with various Alberta Crown corporations, departments, agencies, boards, educational
           institutions and commissions in the ordinary course of operations. Such transactions include premiums from the
           organizations and certain funding obligations relating to Occupational Health and Safety and the Appeals
           Commission that are in accordance with the applicable legislation and/or regulations. WCB is related to these
           entities by virtue of common influence by the Government of Alberta and as a government-related entity, WCB is
           not required to disclose these transactions under the exemption in IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures. Transactions
           with AIMCo as the exclusive manager for WCB’s investment portfolio, which include management fees and other
           expenses as well as investment commitments for certain pools, may not be consistent with usual commercial
           practice for similar services and vehicles. Because they are significant, investment management fees and expenses
           are shown separately on the Statement of Financial Performance and Comprehensive Income and disclosed in Note
           6 Investment Income and Expense, with funding commitments disclosed in Note 5 Investments.

           KEY MANAGEMENT COMPENSATION
           Key management personnel of WCB, comprising the Board of Directors and the executive and their close family
           members, are also related parties in accordance with IAS 24. As at the reporting date, there were no business
           relationships, outstanding amounts or transactions other than compensation, between WCB and its key
           management personnel.




                                          WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                      - 87 -




138                                                                                   Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                                                                               Other Financial Information




           The tables below present total compensation of the board members and executive of WCB.

           ($ thousands)                                                                                                                           2024

                                                                                                                 Base           Other Cash     Non-Cash                   4
                                                                                                                        1               2                 3        SERP                T ot a l
                                                                                                              Salary            Benefits       Benefits
                                            5
           Chair, Board of Directors                                                                         $              -   $      54      $           4   $               -   $              58
                                 5
           Board Members                                                                                                    -         113                 13                   -             126
           President and Chief Executive Officer                                                                    420                38                 42                  74             574
           Chief Financial Officer                                                                                  397                    6              43                  73             519
           Chief Technology Officer                                                                                 312                18                 40                  38             408
           Secretary and General Counsel                                                                            259                    8              32                   5             304
                                                                   6
           Senior Vice President, Operations & Innovation                                                           193                    3              28                  40             264
                                                                         7
           Vice President, Employee and Corporate Services                                                          241                16                 41                  14             312
           Vice President, Millard Health and Special Care Services                                                 259                44                 39                  21             363
                                                                                                   8
           Vice President, Employer Account Services & Claims Management Support                                    118                12                 16                   3             149
                                                                              9
           Vice President, Client Services & Disability Management                                                      19                 1               4                   -                  24
                                                                                                                                                   2023
           Chair, Board of Directors                                                                         $              -   $      40      $           1   $               -   $              41
           Board Members                                                                                                    -          78                 11                   -                  89
           President and Chief Executive Officer                                                                    402                37                 41                  64             544
           Chief Financial Officer                                                                                  382                13                 42                  64             501
           Chief Technology Officer                                                                                 297                    6              60                  20             383
           Secretary and General Counsel                                                                            241                    6              45                  17             309
           Senior Vice President, Operations & Innovation                                                           382                    6              42                  76             506
                                                                         10
           Vice President, Employee and Corporate Services                                                          300                    6              46                  41             393
           Vice President, Millard Health and Special Care Services                                                 241                    6              39                  18             304
           1
               Base salary is pensionable base pay.
           2
               Other cash benefits for Board Members comprise honoraria pay for meetings attended, while other cash benefits for other key management includes car allowances and vacation
               payouts.
           3
               Non-cash benefits include employer's share of all employee benefits and payments made to, or on behalf of, employees including statutory contributions, pension plans, extended
               health care benefits, group life insurance and professional memberships.
           4
               SERP represents employer's current service cost for benefits accrued under a supplemental executive retirement plan. See Note 11 Employee Benefits for details of the plan, and
                the following table for the costs and obligations related to each named key management position.
           5
               The Chair of the Board of Directors and the Board Members are part-time positions. In 2024, three new vacancies were filled, increasing the total number of positions to nine, up
                from six in 2023
           6
               Incumbent retired as an officer effective June 30, 2024
           7
               Incumbent took office January 1, 2024.
           8
               Position effective July 1, 2024.
           9
               Position effective December 2, 2024.
           10
                Incumbent retired as an officer effective December 31, 2023




                                                               WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                                - 88 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                                                                                       139
Other Financial Information




           SUPPLEMENTAL EXECUTIVE RETIREMENT PLAN
                                                                                                                 2024                                                        2023
                                                                                     Current                                             Ac c rue d
                                                                                                      Other Costs2     Ne t Co st                            Net Cost         Ac crued Obligation
                                                                                   Service Cost 1                                       O bliga tio n

           President and Chief Executive Officer                                   $         74      $         21    $         95       $        453     $         113        $             358
           Chief Financial Officer                                                          73                 53             126             1,449                236                    1,323
           Chief Technology Officer                                                         38                 17              55               225                103                      170
           Secretary and General Counsel                                                      5                12              17               163                     38                  146
                                                                    3
           Senior Vice President, Operations & Innovation                                   40                (11)             29             1,679                209                    1,650
                                                                    4
           Vice President, Employee & Corporate Services                                    14                  2              16                 16                     -                      -
                                                                    5
           Vice President, Employee & Corporate Services                                       -                 -                  -               -                   86                  862
           Vice President, Millard Health and Special Care Services                         21                 13              34               157                     37                  123
           Vice President, Employer Account Services & Claims
                                         6                                                    3                 2                   5               5                    -                      -
           Management Support
                                                                               7
           Vice President, Client Services & Disability Management                             -                1                   1               1                    -                      -

           1
               Current service cost represents the actuarial present value of future benefit obligations arising from employee service in the current period.
           2
               Other costs include interest on the liability and actuarial gains and losses arising from assumption changes and/or experience, less any benefit payments.
           3
               Incumbent retired as an officer effective June 30, 2024.
           4
               Incumbent took office January 1, 2024.
           5
               Incumbent retired as an officer effective December 31, 2023.
           6
               Position effective July 1, 2024.
           7
               Position effective December 2, 2024.




       18. CONTINGENCIES AND INDEMNIFICATION
           LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
           WCB is party to various claims and lawsuits, related to the normal course of business, that are currently being
           contested. Based on the total amount of all such actions, WCB has concluded that the outcomes will not have a
           material effect on the results of operations or financial position.

           INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENTS
           In the normal course of operations, WCB enters into contractual agreements that contain standard contract terms
           that indemnify certain parties against loss. The terms of these indemnification clauses will vary based upon the
           contract, and/or the occurrence of contingent or future events, the nature of which prevents WCB from making a
           reasonable estimate of the potential amount that may be payable to those contractual parties. Such
           indemnifications are not significant, nor has WCB made any payments or accrued any amounts in the financial
           statements in respect of these indemnifications.




                                                                WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                                    - 89 -




140                                                                                                                  Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025
                                                                                                                                             Other Financial Information




       19. SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION

           a) Cash and cash equivalents
           Cash held in bank accounts for operational cash needs generated an average annual return of 5.1% (2023 - 5.3%).

           b) Trade and other liabilities


           ($ thousands)                                                      Trade                   Other                   2024                 2023


           Trade payables                                                $         77,261        $                -     $        77,261       $       45,514
           Lease obligations - Note 10                                                  -                   7,212                 7,212                7,703
           Other liabilities                                                            -                   7,315                 7,315                9,418
                                                                                   77,261                  14,527                91,788               62,635


           Current portion                                                         76,908                     2,634              79,542               47,108
           Non-current portion                                                        353                  11,893                12,246               15,527
                                                                         $         77,261        $         14,527       $        91,788       $       62,635


           c) Safety Rebates

           ($ thousands)                                                                                                      2024                 2023


           Sa f e t y r e ba t e s pa y a bl e , b e g i nni ng o f y e a r                                             $        85,996       $       80,999
           Payment of prior years' rebates                                                                                      (86,884)             (77,156)
                                                                                                                                     (888)                3,843
           Adjustment of prior years' accruals                                                                                       1,711            (2,771)
           Outstanding balance from prior years                                                                                       823                 1,072
           Rebates for the year (Note 13)                                                                                       103,413               84,924
           Sa f e t y r e ba t e s pa y a bl e , e nd of y e a r                                                        $       104,236       $       85,996


           d) Injury Reduction
                                                                                                                              2024                 2023
           ($ thousands)


           Injury reduction recovery from premiums                                                                      $        78,684       $       74,772


           Occupational Health and Safety                                                                                       (47,503)             (43,395)
           Industry sponsored safety associations                                                                               (26,811)             (25,974)
                                                                                                                                (74,314)             (69,369)
           I n j ur y r e du c t i o n                                                                                  $            4,370    $           5,403




                                                            WCB-Alberta 2024 Annual Report • Financial Statements and Notes
                                                                                        - 90 -




Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024 – 2025                                                                                                                  141
Annual Report Extracts and Other Statutory Reports




Annual Report Extracts and Other Statutory Reports

Statutes of Alberta Chapter P-39.5 – Public Interest Disclosure
(Whistleblower Protection) Act
Section 32 of the Public Interest Disclosure (Whistleblower Protection) Act requires the chief officer
of a department to report annually on all disclosures made to the designated officer of the
department, public entity or office of the Legislature for which the chief officer is responsible. This
constitutes the annual report of the chief officer of the department covering the period of
April 1, 2024 to March 31, 2025. There were no disclosures of wrongdoing filed with the Public
Interest Disclosure Office for the ministry.




142                                                        Jobs, Economy and Trade | Annual Report 2024–2025
