Seniors, Community and Social Services, Government of Alberta | Seniors, Community and Social
Services 2024 –2025 Annual Report

©2025 Government of Alberta | Published: June 2025
ISBN 978-1-4601-6272-9
ISSN 2817-2639

This publication is issued under the Open Government Licence – Alberta (http://open.alberta.ca/licence).

Note to Readers: Copies of the annual report are available on the Alberta Open Government
Portal website https://open.alberta.ca//publications/2817-2639



ii                                              Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
Table of Contents

Preface ........................................................................................................................................................ 2

Minister’s Accountability Statement .............................................................................................. 3

Message from the Minister ................................................................................................................. 4

Management’s Responsibility for Reporting .............................................................................. 6

Results Analysis ..................................................................................................................................... 8
      Ministry Overview ............................................................................................................................................ 9
      Discussion and Analysis of Results .................................................................................................... 15
      Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology ..................................................................... 63

Financial Information ......................................................................................................................... 70
      Reporting Entity and Method of Consolidation .............................................................................. 71
      Ministry Financial Highlights ................................................................................................................... 72
      Supplemental Financial Information ................................................................................................... 75
      Financial Statements of Other Reporting Entities ........................................................................ 77
      Other Financial Information ................................................................................................................... 125

Annual Report Extracts and Other Statutory Reports....................................................... 131
      Public Interest Disclosure (Whistleblower Protection) Act ..................................................... 131




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                         1
Introduction




Preface

The Public Accounts of Alberta are prepared in accordance with the Financial Administration Act
and the Sustainable Fiscal Planning and Reporting Act. The Public Accounts consist of the annual
report of the Government of Alberta and the annual reports of each ministry.

In October 2024 the government announced the update on the new ministry structures on
continuing care and the health refocusing work originally announced in November 2023. The
Minister of Seniors, Community and Social Services, Jason Nixon, became the sector minister for the
new continuing care provincial health agency. As such, some responsibilities of the Ministry of
Health were transferred to the Ministry of Seniors, Community and Social Services.

The 2024-25 Annual Report reflects the 2024-27 Ministry business plans, the Government of
Alberta Strategic Plan, as well as the ministry’s activities and accomplishments during the 2024-25
fiscal year, which ended on March 31, 2025.

The Annual Report of the Government of Alberta contains Budget 2024 Key Results, the audited
Consolidated Financial Statements and Performance Results, which compares actual performance
results to desired results set out in the government’s strategic plan.

This annual report of the Ministry of Seniors, Community and Social Services contains the Minister’s
Accountability Statement, the ministry’s Financial Information and Results Analysis, a comparison
of actual performance results to desired results set out in the Ministry Business Plan. This ministry
annual report also includes:

•   the financial statements of the Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee, Estates and Trusts, for
    which the minister is responsible;
•   financial information relating to Persons with Developmental Disabilities Clients Trust Funds;
•   financial statements for Alberta Social Housing Corporation; and
•   other financial information as required by the Financial Administration Act and Fiscal Planning
    and Transparency Act, as separate reports, to the extent that the ministry has anything to
    report.
All Ministry Annual Reports should be considered along with the Government of Alberta Annual
Report to provide a complete overview of government’s commitment to openness, accountability,
and fiscal transparency.




2                                            Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                          Introduction




Minister’s Accountability Statement

The ministry’s annual report for the year ended March 31, 2025, was prepared under my direction
in accordance with the Sustainable Fiscal Planning and Reporting Act and the government’s
accounting policies. All the government’s policy decisions as at June 5, 2025 with material economic
or fiscal implications of which I am aware have been considered in the preparation of this report.




[Original signed by]
Jason Nixon
Minister of Assisted Living and Social Services




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                    3
Introduction




Message from the Minister

                                        I am pleased to present the 2024–25 Annual Report for
                                        Seniors, Community and Social Services, highlighting our
                                        work to protect and support Alberta’s most vulnerable
                                        residents in partnership with community organizations,
                                        government colleagues, and valued stakeholders.

                                        Albertans continue to face challenges in 2024-25 and I am
                                        pleased to say that my ministry has stepped up in a big way
                                        with key investments, services and supports to help
                                        Albertans in need regardless of ability, financial status or
                                        age.

                                         Addressing the need for affordable housing continued to be
                                         an area of focus for my department, and our work is paying
                                         off. In 2024, we cleared the way for more homes to get built
                                         in the province, leading to a record-breaking year for
                                         housing starts. It resulted in the City of Calgary seeing the
                                         biggest drop in rental prices in Canada, and Alberta
                                         communities making up six of Canada’s top ten most
                                         affordable small and mid-size rental markets. We broke
Alberta’s all-time record for the most apartment unit starts in 6 months, when the first half of 2024
saw 9,903 apartment unit starts. In support of this, we launched the Stop Housing Delays online
portal to help cut red tape and get homes built faster. The ministry invested $395.5 million to build,
renew, maintain, and operate affordable housing, including rent supplements. An additional $56.8
million was provided through the Seniors Lodge Assistance Program to address challenges faced by
seniors housing providers. I look forward to continuing this momentum into 2025.

While we focused on getting more homes built faster, we continued to work with our partners to
combat homelessness across Alberta. We invested an unprecedented amount into combating
homelessness including the largest investment to address homelessness in Alberta’s history. We
established 24/7 shelter services across the province and introduced Indigenous-led and women-
only shelter spaces. We also established life-changing Navigation and Support Centres in Edmonton
and Calgary, a one-stop shop for vulnerable Albertans to access a wide-range of social supports and
services. The Navigation Centres have helped more than 10,000 unique individuals access supports
since the first one opened a year ago.

We are committed to ensuring that Alberta continues to have the best disability programs in
Canada. Our government is investing record amounts into supporting Albertans with disabilities,
ensuring our province is the best place to live, work and raise a family. Last year alone we invested
more than $3.5 billion in supporting Albertans with disabilities.

We also advanced the modernization of disability program applications by launching a user-
friendly, accessible digital process for the Persons with Developmental Disabilities (PDD) and
Family Supports for Children with Disabilities (FSCD) programs. This streamlined experience
ensures applicants only need to share their story once.

Alberta has some of the most generous social programs in Canada and we continue to increase
financial benefits for vulnerable Albertans. This includes indexing the Assured Income for the
Severely Handicapped (AISH), Income Support, and Seniors Benefit to match inflation. We will



4                                            Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                            Introduction



continue to protect supports for vulnerable Albertans and ensure services are sustainable for future
generations.

Rising living costs continue to put financial pressure on many vulnerable Albertans, including our
seniors. We invested in several programs to support seniors so they can age with dignity and
remain independent. This includes investment in initiatives like Healthy Aging, Drive Happiness,
FCSS as well as improved and increased funding for seniors housing programs to ensure seniors
lodges can continue to serve as vibrant community hubs. These investments help seniors age safely
and independently in their homes and communities, enhance non-medical home supports, like meal
preparation, yard work, strengthen caregiver supports and connections for Albertans caring for
loved ones. This is in addition to our monthly senior’s benefit. In total we allocated $517.5 million
to support the more than 800,000 seniors who call Alberta home.

I would be remiss if we did not mention our collective efforts to support the recovery of the Town
of Jasper following the devastating wildfire in 2024. In addition to wildfire fighting and suppression
efforts, Alberta invested over $181 million to support Jasper’s recovery. To support those displaced
by the wildfire, my ministry provided $12.6 million in Emergency Evacuation Payments to help
cover shelter, food, clothing, and transportation.

Finally, I was honoured to be named as the minister responsible for Assisted Living Alberta, a new
public health agency focused on continuing care health services. Work is well underway to support
this transition, and I look forward to reporting on our work in the near future.

These are just some of the key highlights and accomplishments from the past year. As you read
through this report, you will learn about the collective efforts of our ministry, partners, and
communities to support thousands of vulnerable Albertans and seniors. Together, we remain
committed to ensuring all Albertans have the support they need to meet their basic needs, actively
engage in their communities, and achieve their goals.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                      5
Introduction




Management’s Responsibility for Reporting

The Ministry of Seniors, Community and Social Services includes:

•   Department of Seniors, Community and Social Services
•   Citizen’s Appeal Panel
•   Premier’s Council on the Status of Persons with Disabilities
•   Family Support for Children with Disabilities Provincial Parent Advisory Committee
•   Alberta Social Housing Corporation
The executives of the individual entities within the ministry have the primary responsibility and
accountability for the respective entities. Collectively, the executives ensure the ministry complies
with all relevant legislation, regulations and policies.

Ministry business plans, annual reports, performance results and the supporting management
information are integral to the government’s fiscal and strategic plan, annual report, quarterly
reports, and other financial and performance reporting.

Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the accompanying ministry financial information
and performance results for the ministry rests with the Minister of Seniors, Community and Social
Services. Under the direction of the Minister, I oversee the preparation of the ministry’s annual
report, which includes the financial information, performance results on all objectives and
initiatives identified in the ministry business plan, and performance results for all ministry-
supported commitments that were included in the 2024-27 Government of Alberta Strategic Plan.
The financial information and performance results, out of necessity, include amounts that are based
on estimates and judgments. The financial information is prepared using the government’s stated
accounting policies, which are based on Canadian public sector accounting standards. The
performance measures are prepared in accordance with the following criteria:

•   Reliable – Information used in applying performance measure methodologies agrees with the
    underlying source data for the current and prior years’ results.
•   Understandable – the performance measure methodologies and results are presented clearly.
•   Comparable – the methodologies for performance measure preparation are applied consistently
    for the current and prior years’ results.
•   Complete – outcomes, performance measures and related targets match those included in the
    ministry’s Budget 2024.
As Deputy Minister, in addition to program responsibilities, I am responsible for the ministry’s
financial administration and reporting functions. The ministry maintains systems of financial
management and internal control which give consideration to costs, benefits, and risks that are
designed to:

•   provide reasonable assurance that transactions are properly authorized, executed in
    accordance with prescribed legislation and regulations, and properly recorded so as to maintain
    accountability of public money;
•   provide information to manage and report on performance;
•   safeguard the assets and properties of the province under ministry administration;



6                                            Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                               Introduction



•   provide Executive Council, the President of Treasury Board and Minister of Finance, and the
    Minister of Seniors, Community and Social Services the information needed to fulfill their
    responsibilities; and
•   facilitate preparation of ministry’s business plans and annual reports required under the
    Sustainable Fiscal Planning and Reporting Act.
In fulfilling my responsibilities for the ministry, I have relied, as necessary, on the executives of the
individual entities within the ministry.




[Original signed by]
Dennis Cooley
Deputy Minister of Social Services
June 5, 2025




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                            7
Results Analysis




Results Analysis

Table of Contents
    Ministry Overview ............................................................................................................................................ 9
          Organizational Structure ....................................................................................................................... 9
          Operational Overview .......................................................................................................................... 10
          Key Highlights ......................................................................................................................................... 13
    Discussion and Analysis of Results......................................................................................................... 15
          Actions that support the priorities of the Government of Alberta Strategic Plan....... 15
          Outcome One: Stability – Albertans are safe and have timely and consistent
          access to supports and services to help meet basic needs and maximize their
          independence. ......................................................................................................................................... 16
          Outcome Two: Participation – Albertans participate in their communities
          through employment, volunteerism and other opportunities to reach their
          individual potential and contribute to community life. ......................................................... 37
          Outcome Three: Inclusion – Albertans can access social services across the
          province that foster their resiliency and support community inclusion and
          diversity. .................................................................................................................................................... 48
          Outcome Four: A modernized and re-focused health care system that delivers
          the highest quality patient care to all Albertans, including Indigenous Peoples,
          regardless of where they reside in the province, and is fiscally sustainable ................ 56
    Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology......................................................................... 63




8                                                                               Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis




Ministry Overview
The Ministry of Seniors, Community and Social Services supports Albertans through a range of
programs and services in the areas of employment supports; disability supports; prevention of
elder abuse; community well-being and resilience, including supporting seniors to live and age well
in the community; housing stability and homeless supports; health benefits; and financial
assistance programs. Seniors, Community and Social Services is committed to providing supports to
Albertans and working to ensure those supports are delivered in a manner that is fiscally
responsible and sustainable into the future.

In 2024-25, Continuing Care was transitioned from the Ministry of Health to the Ministry of Seniors,
Community and Social Services.

The ministry is focused on achieving four outcomes:

•   Outcome One: Stability – Albertans are safe and have timely and consistent access to supports
    and services to help meet basic needs and maximize their independence.
•   Outcome Two: Participation – Albertans participate in their communities through
    employment, volunteerism and other opportunities to reach their individual potential and
    contribute to community life.
•   Outcome Three: Inclusion – Albertans can access social services across the province that foster
    their resiliency and support community inclusion and diversity.
•   Outcome Four: A modernized and re-focused health care system that delivers the highest
    quality patient care to all Albertans, including Indigenous Peoples, regardless of where they
    reside in the province, and is fiscally sustainable.
Note: Outcome Four, related to providing continuing care, was originally Outcome Two in the
2024-27 Health Business Plan. It was renumbered for ease of reporting in this annual report.

Organizational Structure




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                     9
Results Analysis



Operational Overview
Seniors, Community and Social Services aims to accomplish the four outcomes through the work of
the department shown below:

Office of the Deputy Minister
The deputy minister oversees the ministry under the direction of the minister and is the liaison
between the elected official and department staff. The deputy minister provides strategic advice,
oversees the ministry’s day-to-day operations, budget and program development.

Continuing Care
The Continuing Care division is responsible for developing provincial strategic policy, performance
oversight, and licensing and compliance monitoring for all streams of continuing care programs and
services which includes home and community care, supportive living and continuing care homes.
The division leads continuing care policy through the development of legislation (i.e., the
Continuing Care Act and related regulations and standards), strategic initiatives that enable
innovation and transformation of the continuing care sector, and evaluation frameworks to identify
performance expectations and governance structures for monitoring system performance. The
division works extensively with other government ministries, Alberta Health Services, and other
stakeholders to support Albertans to age with dignity in their communities, continuing care homes,
or supportive living accommodation, with high-quality care services and wraparound supports that
enable their independence and quality of life.

Disability Services
The Disability Services division is responsible for the delivery of legislated and non-legislated
programs, services and supports to help children, youth and adults with disabilities to live and
participate in their communities. Programming includes the Family Support for Children with
Disabilities program, the Persons with Developmental Disabilities program, the Fetal Alcohol
Spectrum Disorder initiative and Provincial Disability Supports Initiatives, which include the
Alberta Brain Injury Initiative, Community Access for People in Continuing Care and Cross
Disability Support Services.

The division works with stakeholders and communities to identify issues and to deliver supports
and services to people with disabilities and their families. Disability Services supports the Office of
the Advocate for Persons with Disabilities, the Premier's Council on the Status of Persons with
Disabilities, and the Family Support for Children with Disabilities Provincial Parent Advisory
Committee.

Employment and Financial Services
The Employment and Financial Services division is responsible for delivering career and
employment services, overseeing operations of the ministry’s 51 Alberta Supports Centres, the
provincial Alberta Supports Contact Centre and the 24/7 Income Support Contact Centre. The
division is responsible for the delivery and administration of financial and health benefits for over
139,000 Albertans accessing the Income Support and Assured Income for the Severely
Handicapped programs. The provision of career and employment services includes managing
contracts with service providers and delivering employment services, such as those available on the
alis.alberta.ca careers, learning and employment website and through Disability Related
Employment Supports. Employment and Financial Services administers the Child Support Services
program, Alberta Adult Health Benefits, Child Health Benefits and conducts investigations to ensure
the integrity of benefit programs. The division is also responsible for providing information,
emergency benefits and delivering Emergency Evacuation Payments during natural disasters.



10                                            Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                         Results Analysis



Housing
The Housing division supports the development and maintenance of affordable housing, as well as
provides Albertans in need with access to safe and affordable housing options. The Housing division
develops programs to support affordable housing and provides funding enabling housing operators
to deliver housing that meets Albertans’ needs. The division supports 60,746 affordable housing
units that serve more than 110,000 Albertans. The division is accountable for Alberta's seniors’
lodges, social housing (Family and Community Housing and Seniors' Self-Contained Housing), the
Lodge Assistance Program, affordable housing agreements, Specialized Housing and the Rent
Supplement Program. The division also implements the Indigenous Housing Capital Program and
Affordable Housing Partnership Program. The division is also responsible for the Continuing Care
Capital Program, which provides funding to create and modernize continuing care spaces.

Preventive Community Services
The Preventive Community Services division develops programs, administers funding and works
closely with community partners to prevent and address a wide range of social issues including
homelessness and to implement affordability initiatives such as funding for food security and low-
income transit programs. The division oversees funding and the accountability framework for the
Family and Community Support Services program, which partners with municipalities and Metis
Settlements in delivering preventive social services. The division provides funding and oversight
for the Service Dog program to support Albertans with disabilities to obtain a qualified service dog.

Seniors
The Seniors division develops and delivers programs and services to assist seniors and promote
safety and well-being for Alberta’s aging population. This includes the provision of supplemental
financial assistance programs and services for low-income Albertans aged 65 and older to support
their financial security beyond federal programs. The division promotes programs, policies and
initiatives to address social isolation, elder abuse, older workers, caregivers, ageism, transportation
needs and aging well in community. In addition, the division is responsible for community-based
seniors serving sector development, administering community grants, supporting partnership and
collaboration with stakeholders, and providing input on cross-ministry policies and programs to
support seniors from a government-wide perspective.

Strategic Services
The Strategic Services division provides leadership to define and support the strategic direction of
Seniors, Community and Social Services. The division is responsible for strategic planning, policy
development and coordination, data and analytics, policy advice for decision-making,
intergovernmental relations, and overall improvement of services. Strategic Services leads the
development of modern and accessible digital services, develops and delivers provincial staff
training, provides quality assurance oversight, offers governance oversight to Seniors, Community
and Social Services Agencies, Boards and Commissions, and supports the Citizen’s Appeal Panel in
providing timely, fair, impartial and independent hearings for Albertans. The division also leads red
tape reduction efforts, diversity and inclusion actions, business continuity and emergency response
planning for the department, and accommodations and corporate security services.

The Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee reports through this division. The Office of the Public
Guardian and Trustee provides personal and financial decision-making and certain complaint
investigation services for vulnerable adult Albertans. It also administers the property of minor
children and deceased persons, and provides information, education and support to the public,
private guardians and private trustees.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                      11
Results Analysis



Corporate Finance
Corporate Finance provides strategic financial advice related to legislation, regulations and policies.
The division is responsible for developing the ministry’s budget and forecasts, preparing and
implementing ministry financial reporting, financial compliance and accountability, contract policy
and management, and financial processes and policies to support the delivery of programs.

Communications
Through a service agreement with Communications and Public Engagement, the Communications
branch offers strategic communications advice, writing and planning services. Responsibilities also
include delivering clear and timely information to the public about the ministry’s key initiatives,
programs and services.

Human Resources
Under the “One HR" approach, Human Resources service delivery is provided by Public Service
Commission staff assigned to support Seniors, Community and Social Services. The dedicated team
provides strategic advice in employee and labour relations, occupational health and safety,
workforce development and engagement. Leaders are connected to common human resource
services such as recruitment, classification, policy development and analytics through service
centres within the broader human resource system.

Legal Services
Legal Services is a team of Justice lawyers and staff that provides a full range of non-litigation
services and related strategic advice to all areas of the ministry, including work on contracts,
grants, procurement and legislation. For litigation matters, supports are provided by the Justice
Litigation team and external counsel.

Alberta Social Housing Corporation
The Alberta Social Housing Corporation (ASHC) is a Crown corporation that holds social housing
assets and distributes funds for social housing operating costs, capital projects and affordable
housing programs. The ASHC receives funding from federal and provincial governments to assist
housing operators in supporting affordability. The corporation is governed by a board of directors,
which is chaired by the minister.




12                                            Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                         Results Analysis



Key Highlights
The Ministry of Seniors, Community and Social Services focused on accomplishing outcomes
identified in the 2024-27 Ministry Business Plan and 2024-27 Health Business Plan:

•   Stability – Albertans are safe and have timely and consistent access to supports and services to
    help meet basic needs and maximize their independence
•   Participation – Albertans participate in their communities through employment, volunteerism
    and other opportunities to reach their individual potential and contribute to community life
•   Inclusion – Albertans can access social services across the province that foster their resiliency
    and support community inclusion and diversity
•   A modernized and re-focused health care system that delivers the highest quality patient care
    to all Albertans, including Indigenous People, regardless of where they reside in the province,
    and is fiscally sustainable
Key highlights and results achieved by the Ministry of Seniors, Community and Social Services in
2024-25 include:

•   Ensuring ongoing inflation relief – Indexed financial benefits to inflation by two per cent for
    Assured Income for the Severely Handicapped, Income Support and Seniors benefits. (page 17)
•   Supporting wildfire evacuees – Provided $12.6 million in Emergency Evacuation Payments to
    Albertans required to evacuate their homes due to wildfires. (page 18)
•   Enhancing food security – Worked in partnership with and provided $2.2 million to Food
    Banks Alberta to support Alberta’s network of food banks to provide food to Albertans in need.
    (page 19)
•   Connecting vulnerable Albertans to life-changing supports – Assisted over 10,000
    individuals access a range of comprehensive supports and services through the Navigation and
    Support Centres in Edmonton and Calgary. (page 21)
•   Addressing the need for affordable housing – Invested $395.5 million to build, renew,
    maintain and operate affordable housing in Alberta through affordable housing programs,
    including rent supplements. (page 23)
•   Removing barriers to building homes – Launched the Stop Housing Delays web portal to
    enable developers, municipalities and other housing partners to identify areas that are
    preventing fast and efficient residential construction. (page 29)
•   Improving the Seniors Lodge Program – Provided $56.8 million through the Lodge
    Assistance Program grant to respond to the challenges facing seniors housing providers.
    (page 30)
•   Increasing program efficiency – Reduced duplicate data entry for the Income Support online
    application, freeing up almost 1,000 hours per month that workers can spend supporting
    vulnerable Albertans. (page 31)
•   Opening doors to employment opportunities – Invested $81 million in Career and
    Employment Information Services to help Albertans prepare for, find and keep jobs in their
    communities, as well as $3.8 million in grants to employers to assist in meeting their workforce
    demands. (pages 38, 42)




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                        13
Results Analysis



•    Simplifying the application process – Provided Albertans with a user friendly, accessible,
     digital application to improve communication and streamline the process for applying for the
     Persons with Developmental Disabilities program, ensuring that applicants only need to tell
     their story once. (page 43)
•    Making public transit more affordable – Invested $13.8 million to help low-income Albertans
     meet their travel needs for work, recreation and wellbeing through subsidized low-income
     transit pass programs in 19 municipalities. (page 46)
•    Enhancing community well-being – Invested $104.3 million in the Family and Community
     Support Services program for the design and delivery of locally-driven preventive social
     programming. (page 49)
•    Supporting independence – Provided $5.2 million for social prescribing and non-medical
     supports to enable Albertans to live safely and independently at home and in community.
     (page 50)
•    Implementing Alberta’s elder abuse prevention strategy – Invested $3.4 million in
     initiatives to raise awareness of and address elder abuse. (page 51)
•    Transforming the continuing care system – Announced Assisted Living Alberta as the new
     public health agency for the continuing care health services sector as part of the Government of
     Alberta’s ongoing Health transformation. (page 57)
•    Expanded Client Directed Home Care invoicing – Invested $67.2 million to increase total
     hours of care provided through the Client Directed Home Care Invoicing service model which
     enables Albertans to select the home care service provider of their choosing and direct how
     their care is provided. (page 58)
•    Increasing direct hours of care – Provided $136.2 million to incrementally increase direct
     hours of care in continuing care homes, enabling staff to provide a higher quality of care while
     reducing staff stress and burnout. (page 58)
•    Supporting caregivers – Provided $3.7 million to support and strengthen networks, resources
     and connections for caregivers caring for loved ones. (page 59)
•    Growing the continuing care workforce – Invested $100 million through multiple initiatives,
     including bursaries and dual credit programming, to increase workforce supply for health care
     aides. (page 60)
•    Modernizing continuing care homes - Spent over $200 million to modernize existing
     outdated continuing care spaces and add new continuing care spaces in priority areas across
     the province. (page 60)




14                                            Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                  Results Analysis




Discussion and Analysis of Results
Actions that support the priorities of the Government of Alberta Strategic Plan


 Key Priority Two: Investing in Albertans

 Objective Five: Supporting Albertans most in need

 The following results contributed to supporting this objective:

 •   Providing financial assistance to seniors with low income. (page 18)
 •   Reviewing the Seniors Lodge Program to ensure it meets the needs of communities and
     seniors. (page 30)
 •   Increasing program efficiency. (pages 30-31)
 •   Modernizing the Persons with Developmental Disabilities program. (page 43)
 •   Enhancing community well-being with Family and Community Support Services. (page 49)
 •   Supporting the independence and well-being of older adults through the implementation of
     Alberta’s elder abuse prevention strategy. (pages 51-53)




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                15
Results Analysis



Outcome One: Stability – Albertans are safe and have timely and consistent access to
supports and services to help meet basic needs and maximize their independence.
Supporting vulnerable Albertans with financial benefits, access to housing supports and emergency
benefits ensures that all Albertans can meet their basic needs and maximize their independence.

Key Objectives

1.1   Continue to address affordability concerns of seniors with low income and vulnerable
      Albertans.

1.2   Provide funding to support food security for vulnerable and low-income Albertans.

1.3   Continue to implement the Action Plan on Homelessness through a recovery-oriented,
      housing-focused delivery model.

1.4   Continue to implement Stronger Foundations, Alberta’s 10-Year Strategy to address
      affordable housing across the province.

1.5   Create a strategy for attainable and affordable housing focused on middle- and low-
      income renters and buyers.

1.6   Review the Seniors Lodge Program to ensure it meets the needs of communities and
      seniors.

1.7   Continue to modernize and digitize financial support systems to improve access,
      simplify processes and enhance service delivery for Albertans, to ensure sustainable,
      high-quality services are provided to those who need them.




16                                         Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



1.1     Continue to address affordability concerns of seniors with low income and vulnerable
        Albertans.

Ensuring ongoing inflation relief
Seniors, Community and Social Services provides financial support to low income and vulnerable
Albertans to help meet their basic needs through social benefit programs. Albertans who rely on
social benefits continue to be affected by the increased cost of living.

On January 1, 2025, Seniors, Community and Social Services financial assistance program benefits
were increased by two per cent to provide people who rely on these programs with additional
financial support to meet their basic needs. By continuing to index these programs, vulnerable
Albertans will have more resources to keep up with the increased cost of living.

Impact of financial assistance program indexing

                                                                                Monthly rate after
                                                              Monthly rate
             Social benefits rate examples                                          indexing
                                                            prior to indexing
                                                                                 (January 2025)

 Assured Income for the Severely                                   $1,863           $1,901
 Handicapped Living Allowance

 Income Support Single Person

            Expected to Work                                       $824             $842

            Barriers to Full Employment                            $959             $979

 Income Support Couple with Two Children

            Expected to Work                                       $1,746           $1,782

            Barriers to Full Employment                            $1,946           $1,986

 Alberta Seniors Benefit

            Single senior                                          $316             $322

            Senior couple                                          $474             $483

 Supplementary Accommodation Benefit

            Minimum disposable income amount                       $357             $365

 Special Needs Assistance for Seniors

            Maximum amount paid in a benefit year                  $5,643           $5,756
Note:
Benefit amounts will increase with family size.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                     17
Results Analysis



Providing financial assistance to seniors with low income
Seniors financial assistance programs support seniors with low income to meet their basic needs,
afford essential health and personal supports, and age safely in their homes. In 2024-25,
$517.5 million in grants and low-interest home equity loans were provided through seniors
financial assistance programs to support approximately 194,500 seniors with low income to meet
basic needs.

Seniors financial assistance program participation and expenditure

  Seniors Financial
                                                                                         Participation      Expenditure in
    Assistance                                           Description
                                                                                          in 2024-25           2024-25
      Program

 Alberta Seniors                Provides financial support to eligible seniors              194,500          $401.8 million
 Benefit                        with low income to assist with monthly living               seniors1
                                expenses, supplementing the Government
                                of Canada’s Old Age Security, Guaranteed
                                Income Supplement, and Canada Pension
                                Plan programs

 Supplementary                  Provides eligible seniors with low income                   13,600           $85.3 million
 Accommodation                  residing in a continuing care home with                     seniors1
 Benefit                        monthly disposable income of at least $365
                                after paying accommodation charges.

 Special Needs                  Provides financial assistance to eligible                   24,000           $15.6 million
 Assistance for                 seniors with low income to help offset the                  seniors
 Seniors                        cost of some appliances, and specific
                                health and personal supports.

 Seniors Home                   Provides financial assistance to eligible                     590             $6.1 million2
 Adaptation and                 seniors for home repairs, adaptations and                   seniors
 Repair Program                 renovations through low-interest home
                                equity loans and grants.

 Seniors Property               Provides eligible senior homeowners the                      2,070            $8.7 million
 Tax Deferral                   opportunity to defer all, or part of, their                 seniors
 Program                        municipal property taxes with a low-interest
                                home equity loan.
Notes:
1. Average monthly participation over the fiscal year.
2. Includes both grant and loan expenditures.

Emergency evacuation payments in response to disaster relief
Approximately 17,550 Albertans were required to evacuate their homes in 2024 due to wildfires.
Evacuees were able to apply for emergency financial assistance at alberta.ca/emergency using an
Alberta.ca account, by visiting an Alberta Supports Centre or calling the Income Support Contact
Centre. In 2024-25, Seniors, Community and Social Services provided $12.6 million in evacuation
payments to over 12,273 Albertans, including 3,541 children.




18                                                             Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                              Results Analysis



Alberta Supports staff across the province were available during extended hours in the evening and
on weekends to provide emergency funds by e-transfer and debit card to help with basic needs like
shelter, food, clothing and transportation. Benefits were processed almost immediately due to
system enhancements to ensure Albertans were able to cover basic needs. Alberta Supports was
represented at local reception centres as Albertans returned to the community and ministry staff
provided direct supports to community members impacted by evacuations in Chipewyan Lake,
Fort McMurray, Fox Lake, Garden River, Janvier, Jasper and John D’Or Prairie.

Seniors, Community and Social Services collaborated with Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship
Canada to resolve additional challenges for evacuees from Jasper who do not permanently reside in
Alberta. Evacuees were provided with emergency hotel accommodations immediately after the
evacuation, and the Government of Alberta worked with municipalities to support evacuees and
extend their hotel stays for several days.

The ministry implemented initiatives in 2024-25 to improve processes and better support
evacuees, such as the integration of debit card tracking, postal code lookup with community maps,
and proxy applications in My Alberta Emergency Payment System. Fraud prevention resources
played a crucial role in helping staff identify and report potential fraud cases.

1.2    Provide funding to support food security for vulnerable and low-income Albertans.

Supporting food security for Albertans
As the price of groceries continued to be a challenge for many, Alberta’s government ensured food
banks had the resources needed to help Albertans. Local food banks and community organizations
were critical in helping vulnerable Albertans and their families access food and put nutritious meals
on the table.

Seniors, Community and Social Services worked in
partnership with Food Banks Alberta to support the                 Restocking the Jasper Food Bank
province’s food bank network to have the capacity to
respond to Albertans in need. In 2024-25, Seniors,                 Through funding provided by the
Community and Social Services provided $2.2 million                Government of Alberta, Food Banks
to Food Banks Alberta. This funding was                            Alberta provided extensive support to
instrumental in:                                                   the Jasper Food Bank following the
                                                                   loss of its location during the July
•     establishing a program to support food banks                 2024 wildfire. Between August and
      during emergency situations;                                 December 2024, Food Banks Alberta
                                                                   provided 35,973 pounds of food
•     strengthening existing food redistribution and               worth more than $8,600 to restock
      bulk purchase programs to ensure food banks can              the food bank.
      respond to Albertans in need;
•     creating funding streams to assist food banks to purchase equipment (e.g., fridges, freezers,
      etc.) and cover unexpected shortfalls in core operating costs; and
•     building capacity within Alberta’s network of food banks to provide culturally appropriate food
      and respond to the needs of underserved communities.
Food Banks Alberta helped food banks enhance their ability to provide support to underserved
communities, including translating documents into 12 languages to assist newcomers to Alberta to
access food banking services.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                           19
Results Analysis



1.3   Continue to implement the Action Plan on Homelessness through a recovery-oriented,
      housing-focused delivery model.

Implementing recovery-oriented and housing-focused responses to homelessness
Across Canada, the number of people experiencing homelessness has been growing in recent years.
In Alberta, as in other provinces, homelessness trends have historically been impacted by
provincial population trends, particularly provincial in-migration and affordable housing supply. In
2024-25, Seniors, Community and Social Services provided a total of over $223 million Government
of Alberta funding to support homelessness initiatives in Alberta. Over $121.6 million of this
amount supported initiatives from the Action Plan on Homelessness (shelter services) and
Navigation and Support Centres in Calgary and Edmonton, while $101.7 million went to housing
with supports programs in the province.

Addressing emergency shelter needs
In 2024-25, ministry funded emergency and longer-term                     Meeting the high
transitional shelters operated nearly 5,000 temporary and year-           demand for shelter
round spaces located in Calgary, Edmonton, Fort McMurray, Grande          services in rural
Prairie, Lethbridge, Lloydminster, Medicine Hat, Red Deer,                communities
Wetaskiwin and 11 rural communities, listed in the accompanying
text box.                                                                 In 2024-25, Seniors,
                                                                          Community and Social
Overall, there was enough shelter capacity across Alberta to              Services provided funding
support those needing temporary accommodation, even during the            for short-term shelter
winter months. An average of over 3,900 Albertans stayed in               services to:
homeless shelters each night in 2024-25. Shelter utilization
between November and March averaged 85 per cent, with winter               •   Canmore
utilization averaging 83 per cent in Calgary and 87 per cent in            •   Cold Lake
Edmonton. Shelter utilization in rural communities during winter           •   Drayton Valley
months averaged 58 per cent.
                                                                           •   Edson
Supporting 24/7 shelter services                                           •   Hinton*
Alberta continues to maintain the Action Plan on Homelessness              •   Lac La Biche
recommendation for 24/7 shelter operations. Providing 24/7                 •   Leduc
supports in shelters helps to better connect people experiencing           •   Peace River
homelessness to the supports they need during the day, such as             •   Spruce Grove
referral services and access to recovery-oriented services including
detoxification and treatment. In 2024-25, Seniors, Community and           •   Strathmore*
Social Services funding supported the 24/7 operation of over 4,500         •   Rocky Mountain
year-round spaces in over 30 homeless shelters across nine Alberta             House*
communities and to support additional winter response shelter
services across the province, including about 500 overnight spaces.        *New in 2024-25
In 2024-25, an average of 3,700 individuals received daytime
shelter services per month.




20                                          Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                           Results Analysis



Shelter Service Hub Pilot
The Shelter Service Hub pilot in Calgary, Edmonton and Grande Prairie provided on-site support
and referrals for recovery services, primary health services, financial benefits, cultural supports and
identification services. In 2024-25, shelter service hubs diverted over 900 individuals from using
overnight emergency shelter services and were supported to identify immediate alterative housing
arrangements. Shelter service hubs also made over 2,000 referrals and direct connections to
cultural supports and approximately 40,000 engagements with primary health services, which can
include referrals and direct health services. Shelter Service Hub funding will not continue in Calgary
and Edmonton in 2025-26, as many of the services are now centralized at the Navigation and
Support Centres, making those services accessible to more community members. The ministry will
continue to support the Grande Prairie Shelter Service Hub in 2025-26.

Navigation and Support Centres
The Edmonton Navigation and Support Centre was established on January 17, 2024. Navigation and
Support Centres provide a one-stop location for social services where vulnerable Albertans can
access a wide range of supports from multiple Government of Alberta departments and community
agencies, connecting them to income support, shelter and housing options, identification, health
care, mental health resources and addiction treatment. On July 2, 2024, the Government of Alberta
opened an additional navigation and support centre in Calgary to provide targeted support to
vulnerable Calgarians.

As of March 31, 2025, the Navigation and Support Centres in Calgary and Edmonton have assisted
over 10,000 individuals access a range of supports. In many cases, clients return multiple times to
access services and bring people they know who are in need of help along with them.

Number* of services provided on site or referrals at both Edmonton and Calgary Navigation and
Support Centres

                                                           Edmonton          Calgary
                        Service type                     Jan 17, 2024 –   July 2, 2024 –     Total
                                                          Mar 31, 2025    Mar 31, 2025

  Basic Health Services                                       2,200           1,426           3,626

  Connection to Shelter Services                              1,893            563            2,456

  Government Financial and Income                             4,967           4,072           9,039
  Assistance

  Connection to Housing Support                               1,834           2,052           3,886

  Government Identification Services                          6,006           3,797           9,803

  Indigenous Resources/Information                             584            1,534           2,118

  Probation Services                                               43          130             173

  Mental Health and Addiction Services                        1,957           2,111           4,068
Note:
*Numbers do not represent unique individuals.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                        21
Results Analysis



Housing with supports programs
In 2024-25, Seniors, Community and Social Services provided $101.7 million to seven community-
based organizations in Calgary, Edmonton, Fort McMurray, Grande Prairie, Lethbridge,
Medicine Hat and Red Deer to support local projects that connect people experiencing
homelessness with housing and supports. These programs support people experiencing
homelessness to move into stable housing with wraparound supports to address the unique and
complex issues that contributed to their homelessness. Wraparound supports may include
addiction treatment, mental health services, employment skills training and rent support. Funded
programs also work to connect people with recovery-oriented services, for those who need them.

Housing with supports program clients rely less on                    Achieving housing stability
emergency public services and are better connected to
income sources and community resources. Albertans                     In 2023-24*, 94 per cent of
receiving housing with supports are able to increase their            clients who received housing
self-sufficiency, with the number of people with employment           supports remained stably
and a source of income increasing as they leave the program.          housed or exited to another
From April 1 to December 31, 2024, over 5,800 Albertans               type of stable housing.
were supported by housing and supports programs, including
nearly 1,000 Albertans who were newly admitted to housing             The most recent year for which full-year
                                                                      *

                                                                      program data is available
with supports programs.

Updating Alberta’s approach to homelessness
In December 2024, Seniors, Community and Social Services announced an update to the approach
to responding to homelessness and will streamline provincial housing and supports program
funding by providing it directly to service providers. The ministry also announced an expert panel
will be established to help shape Alberta’s approach to combatting homelessness, with an increased
focus on Indigenous people and rural communities.

Unsheltered Homelessness and Encampment Initiative
In December 2024, Alberta’s government successfully negotiated a bilateral funding agreement
with the Government of Canada to support the implementation of the Unsheltered Homelessness
and Encampment Initiative. Through this initiative, the cities of Calgary, Edmonton, Lethbridge and
Red Deer will receive $35 million in federal funding over two years, in addition to Government of
Alberta investments. In 2024-25, Seniors, Community and Social Services allocated over $28 million
of this federal funding to agencies to initiate multiple projects that include enhancing capacity in
the homeless shelter system, creating long-term transitional shelter solutions specifically tailored
to meet the needs of the unsheltered population, and augmenting support for existing outreach
and/or system navigation initiatives that connect people with services they need to support
recovery and long-term stability. This partnership between the federal and provincial governments
is a significant step in helping the most vulnerable find safety, shelter and long-term solutions to
homelessness.




22                                            Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                     Results Analysis



Providing better support to women and Indigenous people experiencing
homelessness
Seniors, Community and Social Services continued to fund services to support women and
Indigenous people experiencing homelessness. In 2024-25, the ministry provided funding to shelter
operators in Calgary and Edmonton to support over 400 women-only spaces.

Indigenous people experiencing homelessness access supports across emergency and transitional
shelters, Navigation and Support Centres and through housing with supports programs. Over 280
shelter spaces are available year-round through Indigenous-led shelter providers in Edmonton,
Grande Prairie and Lethbridge.

1.4 Continue to implement Stronger Foundations, Alberta’s 10-Year Strategy to address
    affordable housing across the province.

Supporting affordable housing through the Stronger Foundations strategy
Stronger Foundations: Alberta’s 10-year strategy to improve and expand affordable housing aims to
transform the current housing system to support an additional 25,000 households by 2032. Of
these, 13,000 will be addressed through the creation of new units and 12,000 will be through rent
assistance. Since the launch of the strategy in 2021, Seniors, Community and Social Services has
built an additional 3,300 new units and supported an additional 3,500 households through rent
support. Key actions in the strategy include:

•   supporting Albertans most in need;
•   improving access;
•   increasing capacity, planning and governance;
•   enhancing sustainability and efficiency; and
•   enabling growth and investment, including maintaining existing units.
The Government of Alberta, together with community partners, continues to support housing
investments over the course of the 10-year roadmap. In 2024-25, Alberta’s government spent
$395.5 million to build, renew, maintain and operate affordable housing in Alberta through the
government-supported affordable housing programs, including rent supplements. Actual spending
was lower than budgeted primarily due to the reallocation of some funds during the fiscal year to
address ministry priorities. In addition, a portion of funding was carried forward to align with
capital project planning and construction timelines. The ministry supported a total of 798 new
households, 388 new units and 410 additional rent supplements. Detailed reporting follows on
pages 24-28.

Maximizing shared contributions with the federal government and municipalities
Seniors, Community and Social Services continued to maximize available federal funding and
deliver cost-matched federal funding provided through the National Housing Strategy Alberta
Bilateral Agreement. Alberta’s progress under the bilateral agreement is on track to meet
established targets and outcomes, which enabled the province to claim over $74 million in federal
funding for affordable housing in 2024-25. Projects funded under Alberta’s Affordable Housing
Partnership Program and Indigenous Housing Capital Program are eligible for federal cost-
matching through the National Housing Strategy Bilateral Agreement. Funding received through the
National Housing Strategy was used to operate affordable housing, as well as construct, maintain
and renew units.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                    23
Results Analysis



In 2024-25, the Government of Alberta worked through the Federal-Provincial-Territorial Housing
Forum to advocate for federal programming and funding that is allocation based, rather than
application based. Alberta’s interests were included in formal, multilateral Housing Forum
correspondence to the federal government on current challenges, opportunities and requests to the
federal government to address areas of high need, where existing federal programming has been
inappropriate or absent.

Alberta’s government works with the federal Ministry of Housing, Infrastructure and Communities,
and the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation to ensure that Alberta’s priorities are addressed
with respect to program and policy design and funding. Alberta monitors federal funding decisions
closely to ensure that the province receives funding that reflects its population size and advocates
to ensure federal programs are designed with maximum flexibility to account for jurisdictional
differences in delivery capacity and areas of highest need.

Alberta’s action plan for the National Housing Strategy guides housing initiatives in the province and
explains funding allocations. The action plan reports on targets, outcomes and results from housing
initiatives and programs. In 2024-25, Alberta joined other provinces and territories to advocate for
a more collaborative relationship with the federal government and has stressed the importance of
the federal government committing to continued bilateral funding for affordable housing in Alberta
beyond the National Housing Strategy’s anticipated expiry in 2028.

Alberta continues to strengthen its bilateral relationship with the federal government to more
effectively navigate negotiations on bilateral agreements and share information on project specific
issues. Alberta and other provinces and territories meet regularly to share best practices in
addressing common points of contention with the federal government.

Increasing housing supply

Affordable Housing Partnership Program
The Affordable Housing Partnership Program fosters collaborative work and prioritizes the goal of
making sure all Albertans have access to safe, stable and affordable housing. Bringing together
partners, such as federal and municipal governments, and other housing providers the program
supports growth and investment across the province. The goal of the program is to deliver
affordable housing solutions that are customized to meet local community needs and increase the
supply of affordable housing units in high demand areas. The program encourages development of
mixed-income and mixed-use housing models, which will enable longer-term sustainability while
increasing the number of affordable housing units available for vulnerable Albertans, including:

•    seniors, individuals and families with low income;
•    individuals recovering from addiction;
•    individuals living with disabilities;
•    individuals and families experiencing domestic violence;
•    veterans; and
•    Indigenous families.
The program provides up to approximately one third of the capital costs to eligible approved
housing projects. The remainder of the funding comes from the project proponent, municipalities,
donors and the federal government. In 2024-25, Seniors, Community and Social Services provided
$15 million to support ten projects in four municipalities to create 259 new units. As of
March 31, 2025, 20 Affordable Housing Partnership Program projects are committed to and



24                                            Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                 Results Analysis



ongoing for a total of 1,035 new units and 359 shelter spaces. Actual spending was lower than
budgeted as funding was carried forward to future years to align with project milestones.

Highlights of Affordable Housing Partnership Program projects completed in 2024-25

                                                                    2024-25                       Estimated
                                                      Total                     Total Ministry
  Community       Organization      Project Name                    Ministry                     Total Project
                                                      Units                       Funding
                                                                    Funding                          Cost

 Calgary          HomeSpace           Crescent         35          $1,854,000   $2,060,000       $11,450,010
                    Society          Heights 12
                                        Ave

 Calgary             Onward           Killarney        29          $3,394,863    $3,394,863      $13,579,452
                     Homes             Project

 Calgary            Silvera for      Livingston        12          $680,000       $680,000       $4,515,124
                     Seniors         Phase 1A

 Edmonton            City of          Holyrood         63          $3,993,681    $3,993,681      $28,063,588
                    Edmonton         Supportive
                                      Housing
                                    Development

 Edmonton            Right at        Montrose           8           $80,000       $400,000       $1,870,000
                      Home           Affordable
                     Housing          Housing
                     Society          Project

 Edmonton            Right at         St. Paul’s       11          $900,000       $900,000       $6,133,359
                      Home             Legacy
                     Housing
                     Society

 Edmonton           Winnifred         HOME 16          17          $271,860       $339,825       $1,561,295
                    Stewart
                   Association

 Leduc               Leduc             Gaetz           24          $1,224,000    $2,040,000      $8,669,041
                    Regional          Landing
                    Housing           Phase 2
                   Foundation

 Lethbridge        CONCEPT          The Edwards        50          $2,227,500    $2,227,500      $6,750,000
                   Investment
                  Partners Ltd.

 Lethbridge       Green Acres       Abbey Road         10          $357,000       $595,000       $3,382,076
                  Foundation          Terrace
                                     Phase 2




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                 25
Results Analysis



Indigenous Housing Capital Program
The purpose of the Indigenous Housing Capital Program is for the Government of Alberta to work
with Indigenous governments and organizations to:

•    increase the overall supply of affordable housing for Indigenous people in Alberta based on
     identified and verified needs within communities;
•    ensure Indigenous households in Alberta with low- to moderate-income have access to
     affordable and adequate housing that meets their basic needs; and
•    support housing design, delivery and ownership by Indigenous people.
In 2024-25, Seniors, Community and Social Services completed three housing projects under the
Indigenous Housing Capital Program to create 37 new housing units. As of March 31, 2025,
15 projects are committed to and ongoing for a total of 496 new units.

Highlights of Indigenous Housing Capital Program projects completed in 2024-25

                                                                                         2024-25       Total        Total
                                                                          Total          Ministry     Ministry     Project
     Community             Organization            Project Name
                                                                          Units          Funding      Funding       Cost
                                                                                        (millions)   (millions)   (millions)

 Edmonton                  Métis Capital            Redevelop               161            $0.7        $7.0         $7.8
                            Housing                 Indigenous
                           Corporation               Affordable
                                                      Housing

 Edmonton                    NiGiNan                Affordable               62            $7.03       $2.1         $12.9
                             Housing                Housing at
                             Ventures               the Sands

 Conklin                    Conklin                 The Conklin             15             $0.03       $4.4         $7.6
                           Resource                 Indigenous
                          Development                 Housing
                            Advisory                  Initiative
                           Committee                 (Phase 1)
Notes:
1. Total units for project are 23, however, seven were reported in the 2023-24 Annual Report.
2. Total units for project are 60, 54 of them were reported in the 2023-24 Annual Report.
3. Funding was paid out in previous fiscal year.




26                                                             Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                     Results Analysis



Supporting Albertans in need of housing

Family and Community Housing program
The Family and Community Housing program subsidizes rental housing for families, seniors and
individuals with low income who cannot afford other housing options due to individual
circumstances. In 2024-25, $79.9 million was provided for the Family and Community Housing
program to support over 10,500 community housing units.

Seniors Self-Contained Housing program
The Seniors Self-Contained Housing program, which is part of the broader Family and Community
Housing program, provides apartment-style housing to seniors who can live independently. In
2024-25, $40 million was provided for the Seniors Self-Contained Housing program to support
approximately 14,300 self-contained units.

Specialized Housing Program
The Specialized Housing program is available to individuals who have specialized housing needs,
including:

•   individuals with developmental disabilities;
•   individuals with physical challenges;
•   individuals and families experiencing domestic violence;
•   wards of the provincial government;
•   the hard-to-house; and
•   any other group with special housing needs.
In 2024-25, a total of $19.6 million was provided for the Specialized Housing program to support
more than 2,000 units for individuals with special needs. The number of units fluctuates based on
changes to annual agreements with operators.

Rent supplement programs
Alberta’s rent supplement program provides a subsidy directly to tenants to help make market
rental accommodations more affordable. There are two types of open benefits under this program.

The Rental Assistance Benefit (RAB) program is a long-term benefit that subsidizes rent for
Albertans with low income. The benefit is available through most housing management bodies
across Alberta and households are prioritized based on need. In 2024-25, the ministry provided
$66.9 million for 38 housing operators to support 10,200 households through the RAB program.
Compared to 2023-24, two additional housing operators participated in RAB and nearly 600 more
households were supported.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                    27
Results Analysis



The Temporary Rental Assistance Benefit (TRAB) program is a
short-term benefit that subsidizes rent for working households         Housing Benefit for
with low income or those between jobs for up to two years.             Survivors of Gender-Based
The program helps eligible tenants afford their rent while they        Violence
stabilize or improve their situation. The benefit is available for
households in Calgary, Edmonton, Fort McMurray, Grande                 In 2024-25, Seniors,
Prairie, Lethbridge, Medicine Hat, Red Deer, and most                  Community and Social
surrounding communities. Households are prioritized on a               Services launched a new
first-come, first-served basis. In 2024-25, the ministry               program to provide a rent
provided $5.2 million for ten housing operators to support             benefit for households
800 households through the TRAB program. Spending and                  experiencing gender-based
uptake for this program was lower than anticipated, reflecting         violence. $9.2 million was
reduced demand relative to other available supports. Housing           provided to assist 946
providers used the unallocated TRAB funding to address the             households fleeing violence.
higher need in the RAB program.

Through the Private Landlord Rent Supplement (PLRS) program, funding is provided directly to
landlords to subsidize Albertans with low income. As part of the Rent Supplement redesign and as
funding agreements under the Canada-Alberta Social Housing Agreement expire, the program is
being phased out and recipients are being transitioned to the RAB program, provided they meet
eligibility requirements. In 2024-25, the ministry provided $11 million for 12 housing operators to
support 908 households through the PLRS program.

Improving existing affordable housing units
Alberta’s government is committed to maintaining existing units while continuing to invest in new
homes. The Capital Maintenance and Renewal (CMR) program provides funding to protect the
integrity of the existing government-owned affordable housing portfolio through planned upgrades,
replacement and maintenance. In 2024-25, $37.1 million was spent in CMR investments, which
included the repair and renewal of 10,354 units through 760 projects and $3.1 million was spent in
CMR grants, which included the completion of 190 units through six projects.

As an action under the Stronger Foundations strategy, the ministry conducted a thorough review of
the CMR process and is developing a maintenance and redevelopment plan for all government-
owned assets. Improvements to the CMR process in 2024-25 included a new digital contract
approval system and consolidating similar work to improve approval timelines. The
implementation of the digital contract approval system has reduced the overall time from tender
closure to contract award from an average of 14 days to an average of five days.

Prior to the Auditor General releasing the November 2024 Processes to Assess and Manage the
Condition of Affordable Housing Performance Audit report on CMR processes, Seniors, Community
and Social Services had already begun work on improvements based on recommendations
previously identified by the ministry. In 2021, Alberta’s government committed to reviewing and
improving its approach to capital maintenance and renewal funding under the Stronger
Foundations strategy action 5.3: develop a five-year maintenance and redevelopment plan for all
government-owned assets and improve capital maintenance and renewal processes. The ministry
initiated work on the maintenance strategy and engaged a consultant to review processes, get
feedback from housing providers on how the system can be improved and develop a long-term plan
for Government of Alberta assets.




28                                            Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                         Results Analysis



In 2024-25, maintenance work concentrated on the health and safety of the tenants and residents,
including installation of new roofs, water heaters, and furnaces, as well as renewal of building
interiors. In addition, the government remains focused on making every unit available by funding
suite renewals, health and safety repairs and ensuring the proper long-term asset management of
the affordable housing portfolio across the province.

Responding to Housing Emergencies
The wildfire at Jasper National Park in July 2024 destroyed approximately one-third of the homes
and businesses in Jasper, including Pine Grove Manor, an independent seniors living complex. In
2024-25, Seniors, Community and Social Services prepared a site which was given by the Town of
Hinton to install 21 modular housing units for seniors. This interim housing will allow residents to
remain close to their community together while the seniors’ home in Jasper is rebuilt. Following the
rebuilding of Pine Grove Manor these units will be used as affordable housing for the Hinton
community.

The ministry also reimbursed the Evergreens Foundation for wildfire operating costs incurred for
the Jasper wildfire related to displaced resident accommodations, travel and meal costs, totaling
$951,965.

1.5. Create a strategy for attainable and affordable housing focused on middle- and low-
     income renters and buyers.

As the Alberta population continues to grow, Alberta’s                Stop housing delays
government recognizes the need for more housing options that
meet Albertans’ needs and budgets. The government has been            Since launching in
clearing the way for more homes to be built faster, using a           November 2024, the Stop
comprehensive approach that includes all levels of government,        Housing Delays web portal
industry, non-profits, and the private sector required to speed       received 71 submissions
up and unlock development, incentivize the building sector and        about 33 communities
better leverage funding.                                              across Alberta.

Seniors, Community and Social Services launched the Stop Housing Delays web portal to enable
developers, municipalities and other housing partners to identify areas that are preventing fast and
efficient residential construction. Through a collaborative, cross-ministry approach, the
Government of Alberta will ensure the appropriate departments are working together to remove
barriers to building homes.

Throughout 2024-25, the Government of Alberta continued to prioritize policies that help create
affordable housing and restore housing attainability for Albertans. Seniors, Community and Social
Services engaged the Ministry of Infrastructure to explore opportunities to use Crown land for
housing developments. Seniors, Community and Social Services also worked with the Ministry of
Municipal Affairs to exempt designated affordable housing from property taxes and reduce red tape
in housing development.

Housing data in 2024 confirms Alberta is helping meet the housing supply challenge, which will
benefit Albertans and help stabilize costs in the long run. Alberta led the country in housing starts
per capita in 2024, with the province seeing a historic jump in the number of new homes under
construction. In 2024, Alberta saw 46,632, which is a 32 per cent increase from 35,223 in 2023. The
first half of 2024 saw 9,903 apartment unit starts – the highest in any half-year in Alberta’s history,
breaking the record set in 1977.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                      29
Results Analysis



According to a January 2025 report by Rentals.ca, Alberta experienced the largest year-over-year
decline in asking rents in 2024. Calgary saw the biggest drop in rental prices in the entire country,
with Calgary’s apartment rents decreasing by 7.2 per cent. Alberta communities made up six out of
Canada’s top ten most affordable small- and mid-size rental markets.

1.6   Review the Seniors Lodge Program to ensure it meets the needs of communities and
      seniors.

Improving the Seniors Lodge Program
The Seniors Lodge Program supports approximately 11,100 lodge units in 150 lodges and
18 unique homes and cottages across Alberta. The program provides services to residents,
including accommodations, meals, laundry, housekeeping and recreational programming for
functionally independent seniors. This represents an increase from the previous year, reflecting the
addition of new lodges across the province.

The Seniors Lodge Review Panel provided opportunities for seniors housing advocates to share
input to ensure Albertans living in lodges, and their families, have a voice in the process of
reviewing the Seniors Lodge Program. In May 2024, the Panel submitted their final report with
recommendations to the minister. Seniors, Community and Social Services began to implement
improvements, including providing additional funding to respond to the challenges facing seniors
housing providers.

In 2024-25, $56.8 million was provided to operators through the Lodge Assistance Program (LAP)
grant to supplement the reduced revenue from housing 7,000 residents below the income
threshold. The ministry raised the rate per eligible resident by 55 per cent, resulting in an increase
of $15 million in LAP funding compared to 2023-24. The number of seniors served in 2024-25
appears lower than previous years due to the removal of a temporary COVID-era funding
exemption when there were higher than normal vacancies in lodges. This exemption, which ended
in 2023-24, allowed higher resident counts to ensure the sustainability of the lodge program. In
2024-25 the department removed the exemption and increased the grant rate to maintain support
for lower-income seniors and the operators who house them.

1.7   Continue to modernize and digitize financial support systems to improve access,
      simplify processes and enhance service delivery for Albertans, to ensure sustainable,
      high-quality services are provided to those who need them.

Increasing program efficiency
Throughout 2024-25, the ministry continued to modernize the way services are delivered,
providing a more personalized and improved user experience for clients, while reducing
administrative burden on staff. A custom-built suite of digital solutions provided better access and
self-service options for applicants and clients while ensuring ministry staff are working effectively
and efficiently.

Contact centres
Seniors, Community and Social Services adopted a contact centre approach to support ongoing
system modernization and provide more effective, timely and consistent services to Income
Support and Assured Income for the Severely Handicapped (AISH) clients. Contact centres help
ensure clients have access to timely assistance by connecting them to the next available Support
and Financial Services Coordinator or AISH generalist instead of waiting to speak to their
designated worker. This balances the workload of ministry staff and provides more consistent and
effective services to Income Support and AISH clients needing assistance with their monthly,


30                                            Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis



personal and health benefits. Throughout 2024-25, contact centres for AISH clients and service
providers were launched in the South, Northeast and Northwest areas.

In November 2024, the ministry also implemented Call Back Assist to all contact centres. This
technology allows callers the option to choose to remain on hold or have a call back without losing
their place in the queue.

The Alberta Supports Contact Centre provided information and referral to over 490,000 Albertans
on a broad range of government and community programs including, financial supports, housing,
seniors programs, health benefits and other social programs. The Income Support Contact Centre,
operating 24/7, answered over 130,000 calls and issued over 58,000 emergency Income Support
and AISH benefits. Emergency benefits include food, shelter, transportation and prescriptions.

Calgary pilot for long-term Income Support recipients
The ministry initiated a pilot project in August 2024 to provide assessment and action planning
support to approximately 1,178 long-term Income Support recipients in Calgary. Identified clients
were registered for a mandatory virtual information session that provided an overview of job
search expectations and related supports. Clients were then scheduled for an updated Employment
Readiness Assessment to further understand their strengths and challenges with their job search.
Using this information, ministry staff created action plans that outlined specific job search
requirements, with employment targets set at 60 days. Participants also register for five days of job
search-related workshops with a contracted service provider to support their activities. Where new
Employment Readiness Assessments were completed, approximately 34 per cent of clients were
recategorized as having barriers to full employment or other client categories based on their
individual circumstances. As of March 31, 2025, approximately 351 long-term Income Support files
closed, 20 per cent closed due to employment, with the remaining 80 per cent closing due to other
circumstances, such as transitioning to other programs and services or non-compliance with the
program obligations.

Assured Income for the Severely Handicapped and Income Support process improvements
In 2024-25, both the online AISH and Income Support applications received meaningful upgrades to
improve how Albertans apply for benefits. Applicants can now use their Alberta.ca account to apply
and if they are verified, they can provide their consent and declaration electronically, saving the
applicant from needing to print, sign and scan their consent and declaration. Since the integration
with Alberta.ca for these applications, there have been 21,613 applications received with digital
consent for Income Support and 2,171 for AISH. This streamlined the application process for the
Albertan, while verifying the identity of the applicant.

Case management
Seniors, Community and Social Services continued to modernize case management systems to
simplify program administration, enhance consistency, drive efficiency, and reduce administrative
burden for clients and staff. In 2024-25, the ministry added case management functionality for
external service providers and enhanced Labour Market Transfer Agreement data flow to the
Federal Government. As a result, the online application is now fully integrated to the case
management system, reducing duplicate data entry and saving staff an average of seven minutes
per application. With over 100,000 Income Support applications received per year, the time savings
on this administrative task equates to almost 1,000 hours per month that workers can spend on
higher value tasks to support vulnerable Albertans.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                    31
Results Analysis



Supporting Albertans leaving correction facilities
                                                                         Connecting people with
Working in collaboration with the Ministry of Public Safety and          criminal records to
Emergency Services, Seniors, Community and Social Services               employers
assisted Albertans leaving correctional facilities by providing
information and support related to employment services,                  The Lethbridge Corrections
Income Support and AISH. Corrections staff engage with Alberta           pilot developed a database
Supports prior to the release of a vulnerable Albertan to help           of employers in Calgary,
them successfully navigate the application process post release.         Lethbridge and Medicine Hat
This process builds on a successful pilot in Edmonton and                who have job opportunities
Lethbridge.                                                              for people with criminal
                                                                         records.
Strengthening program integrity

Assured Income for the Severely Handicapped (AISH) file review pilot
In May 2024, Seniors, Community and Social Services launched the AISH File Review Pilot Project to
verify that client information, including health and financial circumstances, is up to date. Over
15,000 file reviews were completed in 2024-25, averaging 1,672 reviews per month. The project
ensures thorough file assessments, proper benefit allocation, and program integrity through
enhanced transparency and accountability.

Data Enhanced Eligibility Determination
The Data Enhanced Eligibility Determination (DEED) initiative is enhancing program integrity and
fraud prevention by leveraging data from internal and external systems to validate an Albertan’s
self-reported information. The initial DEED digital service was successfully released to a pilot group
of Income Support staff in November 2024, with full provincial roll out in March 2025. DEED is a
multi-year initiative that will be implemented in phases, with an initial focus on the Income Support
program. It will support eligibility determination, both at intake and for ongoing eligibility and case
management, by integrating and automating the verification of applicant and client data. This will
reduce eligibility determination steps, support proactive and early detection of program abuse and
ensure appropriate and accurate distribution of benefits to eligible Albertans.

Information sharing
In February 2025, an information sharing agreement was executed with Advanced Education which
enables sharing of information regarding individuals receiving Income Support, AISH, Student Aid
and Foundational Learning Assistance. This agreement will support proactive and early detection of
duplicate benefits and potential program abuse, ensuring only those eligible for benefits receive the
benefits for which they are entitled.

Appeals process
Albertans have the right to ask for an independent review of certain government program decisions
and the ministry is committed to providing a fair, transparent, and effective appeals process for
Albertans. In 2024-2025, there were 3,583 notices of appeals received, 1,894 hearings scheduled,
and 962 decisions issued. The number of notices of appeals received in a year does not correspond
to the number of decisions issued in that same year. After an appeal is filed, it may be withdrawn by
the appellant or resolved by the program. Additionally, depending on when an appeal is filed, the
hearing and subsequent decision may happen the following year.




32                                            Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Results Analysis



In 2024-25, the decision writing tool in the System for Appeals Management was further enhanced
so that AISH and Income Support decisions could be issued faster after the conclusion of hearings.
To improve efficiency and accountability as appeals volume continues to rise, a new case
management component was introduced to ensure appeals proceed in a timely manner. Albertans
now have a direct point of contact for their appeal and can resolve preliminary issues faster.

Throughout the year, efforts were made to further improve accessibility to appeal services to
ensure that all individuals, regardless of their circumstance, have equitable access to the appeals
process. This includes refining processing, addressing emerging concerns, providing necessary
accommodations for persons with disabilities, and liaising with community organizations to ensure
appellants are able to connect with representatives and advocates to assist them with their appeals.
In the North Zone, appeals administrative processes and hearings were centralized to ensure
greater efficiency and consistent application of AISH and Income Support policy.

Preventing and detecting benefit program abuse
Seniors, Community and Social Services is committed to making sure every dollar spent on financial
benefits goes to Albertans who are eligible for support. The Investigations Unit examines and
evaluates complaints of system abuse, which include undeclared income or assets, providing false
information, unreported spouses or dependents and identity theft. Complaints may result in a
criminal investigation and possible charges if fraud is determined. The Investigations Unit supports
frontline staff to apply proactive and preventive strategies to reduce the incidences of fraud.
Albertans can report suspected fraud of social services programs by visiting
https://www.alberta.ca/report-suspected-fraud-of-social-services-programs.aspx.

In 2024-25, the ministry received approximately 2,312 complaints from the public with 63 per cent
related to Income Support, 36 per cent to the Assured Income for the Severely Handicapped
program, and the remaining one per cent to other programs administered by the ministry. This
breakdown of complaints is consistent with prior years. In 2024-25, the Investigations Unit
accepted 1,084 new matters for investigation, representing a maximum total potential loss of
$10.5 million to the Government of Alberta. During the year, 274 investigations were concluded,
109 of which resulted in criminal or regulatory charges being laid.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                   33
Results Analysis



Performance Measure 1.a:
Median time between when an Assured Income for the Severely Handicapped (AISH)
application is ready for medical adjudication and an eligibility decision is made
(in weeks)

                               Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                    2024-25            2024-25
                                                                                     Target             Actual
      2020-21               2021-22          2022-23             2023-24

         5.9                    9.1            11.6                 4.3                9.0                5.3
Source: Treatment of Income (TOI) System

Description: The Assured Income for the Severely Handicapped (AISH) program provides financial
and health benefits to eligible adult Albertans who have a permanent medical condition that
prevents them from earning a living. Program recipients may have a variety of disabilities,
including physical, mental health and/or developmental disabilities. This performance measure
captures the median time between when an AISH application is ready for adjudication (all
documents required to confirm general and medical eligibility have been received from the AISH
applicant) and when the medical eligibility decision has been made.

Rationale: This measure speaks to the ministry’s efforts to remove red tape and enhance service
delivery for low-income Albertans with a permanent disability.

Results and variance explanation: In 2024-25, the result for this measure was equal to 5.3 weeks,
reflecting a difference of 3.7 weeks from the 2024-25 target of 9.0 weeks, and an increase of 1.0
week from the 2023-24 result of 4.3 weeks. The increase in target for 2024-25 was due to increased
application volumes and staff vacancies. The actual for the year remained within target range.




34                                                    Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                           Results Analysis



Performance Measure 1.b:
Online Seniors Financial Assistance (SFA) Application Utilization

                                 Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                                     2024-25                 2024-25
                                                                                                      Target                  Actual
      2020-21                 2021-22                 2022-23                 2023-24

         N/A                    25%                     38%                     35%                     45%                     49%
Source: Seniors, Community and Social Services, Alberta Seniors Benefit database
Note:
The online SFA application method was introduced in March 2021. There are no historical results available to report prior to the 2021-22
period.

Description: This measure describes the percentage of first-time Seniors Financial Assistance
(SFA) applications completed online out of the total first-time SFA applications received within a
fiscal year. Online application methods include authenticated and non-authenticated applications.
The measure excludes online applications from seniors who have previously applied through any
method, and former Assured Income for the Severely Handicapped recipients who are
automatically enrolled at age 65.

Rationale: This measure speaks to the ministry’s efforts to reduce red tape and improve service
delivery through fast and easy access, and efficiency in application and enrolment to SFA programs.

Results and variance explanation:
In 2024-25, 49 per cent of total first-time SFA applications received were completed online (8,309
out of 17,006 total first-time applications) which exceeds the target for the year. This result
represents an increase of 14 percentage points compared with the 2023-24 result. Factors which
contributed to a higher rate of online SFA online applications include increasing promotion of the
online applications through the information package sent to Albertans six months before they turn
65, and promoting online options to program stakeholders supporting seniors. Albertans with
verified MyAlberta Seniors accounts are able to apply for seniors financial assistance programs
online, view and update banking and personal information, view payment and claim history,
securely upload documents and check on the status of applications. The Canada Post strike for parts
of November and December 2024 also had impact on increasing the number of online applications,
as many seniors chose to apply online rather than through the paper-based method during this
time.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                           35
Results Analysis



Performance Measure 1.c:
New Affordable Housing Units and Rental Subsidies Available for Albertans with Low
Income

                                 Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                                    2024-25                 2024-25
                                                                                                     Target                  Actual
      2020-21                 2021-22                2022-23                 2023-24

         N/A                   2,243                  2,325                   2,302                  1,500                    798
Source: Seniors, Community and Social Services; HOME system
Note:
This measure was introduced in the 2022-25 Seniors and Housing Business Plan. Due to variation in data collection and processing, comparable
historical results are not available prior to the 2021-22 period.

Description: This measure reports on the number of new affordable housing units and new rental
subsidies the ministry has funded or supported for Albertans in need within a fiscal year. The
results of this measure include newly built affordable housing units across five capital programs
and additional households supported under the Rent Supplement program (including the Housing
Benefit for Survivors of Gender-Based Violence, which launched in 2024-25).

Rationale: This measure is a direct reflection of progress made toward achieving the goal of
supporting 25,000 more households by 2032-33 set out in Stronger Foundations: Alberta’s 10-year
strategy to improve and expand affordable housing.

Results and variance explanation: In 2024-25, the ministry delivered 798 new affordable housing
units and new rental subsidies to Albertans with low income. The result reflects the timing and
status of capital builds as most of the capital projects are currently under construction and in
progress that will be coming online in future years. As of March 31, 2025, 1,626 units and 359
shelters spaces are in progress. In addition, the results reflect rising rent prices and corresponding
increases in the maximum benefit available have led to higher individual benefits. As a result, more
funds are allocated to ensure households already in the program are able to maintain their housing,
leaving fewer resources available to expand to new households. The government has increased the
funding for both affordable housing capital projects and rent assistance moving forward.

Affordable housing breakdown

                                                                                  2023-24                            2024-25

 Newly built units                                                                   641                                388
 Additional households supported though Rent                                       1,661                                410
 Supplements




36                                                            Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                  Results Analysis



Outcome Two: Participation – Albertans participate in their communities through employment,
volunteerism and other opportunities to reach their individual potential and contribute to
community life.
Ensuring Albertans can access employment and fully participate in their community promotes
individual prosperity and Alberta’s economy.

Key Objectives

2.1   Provide career and employment information services to improve employment
      outcomes of Albertans experiencing underemployment and unemployment.

2.2   Provide supports for adults and children with disabilities and their families through
      enhanced cross-sector coordination, innovative best practices and modernization.

2.3   Implement the cross-ministry Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) Strategic Plan
      2024-2027 to ensure effective supports for Albertans impacted by FASD.

2.4   Provide funding to support access to transportation services for low-income and
      vulnerable Albertans.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                               37
Results Analysis



2.1     Provide career and employment information services to improve employment
        outcomes of Albertans experiencing underemployment and unemployment.

Supporting Albertans to get back to work
Seniors, Community and Social Services programs helped Albertans make informed career
decisions, develop realistic education, training and employment plans and prepare for, find and
keep jobs in their communities. Services provided include individual employment assistance,
provision of employer events, job fairs and workshops, community referrals, financial support for
employment related supports and, helping them access and use local labour market information.
The goal is to help individuals and families gain independence by providing opportunities to
enhance their skills to obtain employment.

Career and Employment Information Services
In 2024-25, Seniors, Community and Social Services invested $81 million in Career and
Employment Information Services (CEIS), which included partnership-driven career and
employment service centres that target underemployed and unemployed Albertans, including
vulnerable and underrepresented populations in the labour market. Targeted employment services
are provided for:

•     youth to connect with job opportunities and obtain strategies to gain work experience;
•     persons with disabilities to provide accessible equipment and tools and strategies to disclose
      disabilities with employers and to gain employment experience;
•     immigrants to access services in multiple languages;
•     internationally educated professionals to secure employment and gain accreditation;
•     Indigenous and Francophone individuals to connect to employment; and
•     Albertans accessing the Income Support program.
Simulated worksite projects offered through CEIS improved participants skills and knowledge
through programming that replicates workplace experiences by allowing clients to immerse
themselves in realistic worksite activity. These sites enhance real-work experiences, expanding
opportunities for clients facing barriers such as lack of experience, or requiring further training to
connect to work.

Primary Career and Employment Information Services accessed in 2024-25 (by percentage)1
                                                                Exposure Courses
                      Employer Services                               2%
                                                                                     Job Placement
                            8%
                                                                                          34%
                                                                                         Disability Related
                                                                                            Employment
                                                                                              Services
                                                                                                <1%
                      Workforce
                     development
                         54%

                                                                                Specialized
                                                                               Assessments
                                                                   Feepayer        2%
                                                                     <1%
Note:
1. Total does not equal 100 per cent due to rounding.



38                                                      Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                Results Analysis



Primary Career and Employment Information Services offered

                          gathers information about an individual's strengths, needs, and barriers and
 Assessment and
                          provides a foundation for determining the programs and services that may be
 Referral
                          most helpful for the individual in moving towards sustainable employment.

                          provide job-ready individuals with funding for short-term courses to gain the
 Exposure Courses         certification and/or job-specific skills they need, such as first aid or basic
                          computer skills.

                          helps individuals who have the knowledge, skills and attitudes needed for
 Job Placement            employment but need support to develop or refine job search skills, make
                          connections to employers and maintain employment.

                          provides funds for assistive technologies and aids (e.g., specialized computer
 Disability Related
                          software) and assistive services (e.g., tutors and job coaches) and worksite
 Employment
                          modifications (e.g., wheelchair ramps) for persons with disabilities to be
 Supports
                          successful in their education, job search and employment.

                          conducts an in-depth analysis of an individual’s educational, vocational,
 Specialized              medical, intellectual and psychological capabilities. This is used to determine
 Assessment               accommodations or supports required to enable them to find and maintain
                          employment.

                          allows individuals to request continued regular Employment Insurance benefits
 Feepayer                 while in training. Feepayers are responsible to pay for the costs of their training,
                          including tuition, books and supplies.

                          supports individuals who have encountered barriers obtaining or maintaining
 Workforce
                          employment through employment development activities and paid work
 Development
                          exposure.

                          support employers to find appropriate staff to meet their present and future
 Employer Services
                          workforce demands through the provision of employer services.


Virtual delivery of the primary services is offered to ensure access for individuals who may not be
able to attend in-person due to barriers such as childcare or transportation challenges.

In 2024-25, 45,146 unique Albertans accessed CEIS programs and services. There was a total of
701,724 walk-in visits to resource centres, and 2,958 Albertans who attended community
presentations and fairs. Over 6,000 Albertans accessed job search and career support through the
Alberta Supports Contact Centre and Career and Employment contact centres. Through grants to
Alberta Chamber of Commerce, 57 hiring events were held across the province, connecting over
28,000 job seekers with 800 businesses and 305 community partners.

The Work Outcomes Reporting Project (WORP) survey is conducted with individuals three months
after they participated in CEIS. In 2024, 75 per cent of Albertans were satisfied or very satisfied
with the CEIS services they received. Through the WORP survey, 67 per cent of Albertans reported
they had found employment three months after receiving Career and Employment Information
Services (i.e., workshops, exposure courses, job placements and Disability Related Employment
Supports).



Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                             39
Results Analysis



Enhanced employment focus
The Income Support program provides financial benefits to individuals and families who do not
have the resources to meet their basic needs, including food, clothing and shelter. Income Support
consists of two client categories: Expected to Work (ETW) and Barriers to Full Employment (BFE).
The ETW category includes those who are searching for work, working but not earning enough
income to meet their basic needs, or are temporarily incapable of working. The BFE category
includes those who have multiple barriers or persistent mental or physical health challenges that
make obtaining employment take longer and require more supports. Both ETW and BFE caseloads
are composed of single individuals, single-parent families, couples with children and couples
without children.

In 2024-25, the Income Support program experienced an overall increase in caseloads, supporting
an average of 55,849 cases per month. This represents an increase of 15.4 per cent from the prior
year. The average ETW caseload was 38,002, which is 21.6 per cent higher than 2023-24. Higher
ETW caseloads are likely the result of a combination of factors including an increase in the overall
population of Alberta, a higher unemployment rate in the province and increases in the cost of
living, including food and housing. The average monthly BFE caseload increased by 4.1 per cent
over the past year to 17,847 from 17,145 in 2023-24.

Alberta Supports regional Employment Hubs provide tailored services to Income Support clients
closest to employment. The Hubs’ goal is to successfully prepare Albertans to enter the labour
market using various events including job fairs, employment sessions, employer events and one-on-
one services to employers requiring workers. Dedicated Career and Employment Consultants work
with those closest to the labour market to provide tailored services and supports to attach them to
meaningful employment within one to two months of assistance. Employment Hub case managers
work closely with employers, workforce consultants, and contracted providers with an intentional
approach and focus to move clients with barriers closer to the labour market.

In March 2024, Seniors, Community and Social Services implemented Phase 1 of the Negotiated
Accountability Plan approach across the province, focusing on clients who are closest to
employment. Negotiated Accountability Plans are dynamic sets of practices designed to support
accountability for action plans and support Income Support clients taking steps toward
independence. This active practice of client accountability is dependent on client participation in
program obligations. It includes acknowledgment of action plan items and timelines, orientation
sessions, job clubs, job search record-keeping and proactive access to supports with a mutually
agreed upon end date and intentional monitoring of client progress. For the 2024-25 fiscal year, the
average duration for a file with a Negotiated Accountability Plan was 90 days.

Career and Employment Consultants continued throughout 2024-25 to actively work with
employable Ukrainian Evacuee Emergency Financial Support recipients to help them secure
employment.




40                                           Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



Employment supports for Albertans with disabilities
In 2024-25, $22.1 million was invested specifically to provide career and employment services to
Persons with Disabilities. This funding supports the delivery of Specialized Assessments,
employment development, job placements, workplace supports, Disability Related Employment
Supports (DRES), Workplace Exposure and work maintenance supports.

DRES provides funding for supports and services that help Albertans overcome disability related
barriers to employment or education. In 2024-25, one third of the approved DRES applications
were for Job Search Supports, 29 per cent were for Education and Training Supports and 38 per
cent were for Workplace Supports. The average cost per DRES application was $5,634. These
supports assisted Albertans to obtain the skills and training needed for employment and to find and
maintain meaningful employment.

Employment Services Delivery Model transformation
Seniors, Community and Social Services continued to transform the Employment Services Delivery
Model to provide Albertans with improved employment and career development opportunities
while streamlining client navigation towards employment. The transformation evolves how
employment service contracts and grants are structured, with an increased focus on outcomes
monitoring. Throughout the transformation, case management practices seamlessly connect clients
to available training and employment resources and opportunities with an internal and external
service delivery mix.

The Digital Employment Services Pilot, using the Thrive Career Wellness platform, was officially
launched in March 2024. The platform provides enhanced tools for job seekers, including resume
development, job matching, career planning, and training resources. The pilot began with a select
group of Career and Employment Consultants making referrals of individuals they were serving on
the Income Support caseload. Since the launch, the pilot has incrementally expanded to a wider
population of job seekers across multiple regions and program areas, improving access for job
seekers outside the initial pilot areas ensuring more Albertans benefit from digital employment
services. Ongoing enhancements were made to the Digital Employment Services Platform job
search throughout 2024-25, including self reporting of job attainment and the addition of an AI-
driven resume builder. At the end of the 2024-25 fiscal year, the Thrive platform was serving more
than 1,400 job seekers.

Alis
                                                                   Supporting labour attraction
The alis.alberta.ca (alis) website provides employment
resources to help Albertans enhance their employability,           In 2024-25:
plan for education and training, make informed career
choices, and connect to and be successful in the labour            •   61 per cent of alis visits
market. In 2024-25, Albertans accessed alis through                    came from within Alberta;
4.1 million web sessions and 15.4 million page views.              •   18 per cent of alis visits
                                                                       came from elsewhere in
In 2024-25, the department continued to enhance the alis               Canada; and
website with updated labour market information, new career         •   21 per cent of alis visits
advice content, new career planning tools, and improved                came from outside
functionality such as enhancements to the Find Your Fit                Canada.
personalized career recommendation tool.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                     41
Results Analysis



Increasing engagement with employers

Employer Services Grants
Seniors, Community and Social Services provided $3.8 million in grants to employers across the
province in 2024-25 to find, onboard, develop and retain staff. The intended outcomes of employer
services grants include:

•        a decrease in vacant, challenging-to-fill positions and a reduction of individuals relying on
         Income Support benefits;
•        an increase in new hires and/or the retention of staff as a result of received services;
•        increased employer awareness of the tools and resources available to them to assist with their
         workforce demands (both those provided as a part of the program as well as those that are
         external to it);
•        increased employer knowledge and skills on recruitment, onboarding, training and retention
         that will help them to minimize costs while promoting inclusive hiring and ensuring skill
         shortages are met; and
•        a growing network between employers and stakeholders such as service providers, community
         organizations, job seekers and associated ministries so that experience, knowledge and
         resources can be leveraged to employees, employers and jobseekers.
The range of services provided employers assistance with job description development, resume
evaluation and immediate hiring, as well as refinement of recruitment practices to improve staff
retention. During 2024-25, over 8,096 employers accessed supports funded by the ministry to
assist in meeting their workforce demands resulting in over 861 individuals being hired.

                                                         Employer Engagement Training
     Improving employer engagement skills                Effective Employer Engagement (EEE) and
     Participants in EEE and LEE reported                Leading Employer Engagement (LEE) training
     improvements in their employer                      strengthen employer engagement and labour
     engagement skills, including:                       market connections. Piloted in 23-24 with 15
                                                         service providers in the Edmonton region, EEE
     •     86 per cent feeling they can target           and LEE received positive feedback and results.
           employers more effectively;                   In 2024-25, both EEE and LEE were expanded to
                                                         be available across the province and open to all
     •     83 per cent having a greater
                                                         Career and Employment Information Services
           understanding of why and how to
                                                         contracted providers.
           maintain employer relationships;
     •     77 per cent can now gain a thorough           Service providers are selected to participate
           understanding of job vacancies for            based on the demographics they serve, industry
           their clients;                                specialization and service delivery area to ensure
     •     76 per cent feel better equipped to           representation from diverse populations and
           present their clients to employers; and       industries in both urban and rural settings.
     •     93 per cent feel confidence in placing
           more clients in sustainable
           employment.




42                                                 Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                            Results Analysis



In 2024-25, 307 staff members from 38 service provider organizations enrolled in the EEE and LEE
training programs. Completion rates surpassed expectations, with 88 per cent of participants
successfully completing the EEE training and 89 per cent completing the LEE training—exceeding
the initial goal of 80 per cent. Demand for these programs remains high, with 58 individuals
currently on the waitlist for the next cohort intake.

Service providers reported that they improved how they engage with employers based on what
they learned in the training, leveraging practical tools to enhance processes, and feel more
confident in maintaining clear, consistent communication with targeted employers.

2.2    Provide supports for adults and children with disabilities and their families through
       enhanced cross-sector coordination, innovative best practices and modernization.

Modernizing the Persons with Developmental Disabilities program
The Persons with Developmental Disabilities (PDD) program helps eligible adults plan, coordinate
and access services to live as independently as possible in their communities. The program works
with eligible adults to provide support services such as home living supports to help with daily
activities, respite care, community access supports, education and employment supports and
specialized support to help with additional needs due to mental health and behavioural issues.

The ministry provided over $1.2 billion in funding for PDD in 2024-25. The PDD program caseload
increased by 1.8 per cent in 2024-25, from 13,401 at the end of March 2024 to 13,641 in
March 2025. This growth continued to be influenced by:

•     population growth which has shown an increase in individuals with disabilities in the general
      population;
•     increasingly complexity of needs; and
•     change in circumstances resulting in increased supports to address the emergent needs of
      individuals already on active caseload.

Digital tools
Seniors, Community and Social Services launched a                  PDD digital application features
digital application for PDD in June 2024, providing
Albertans with a user friendly, accessible application             The new application makes
that minimizes errors and improves the completeness                applying for PDD easier for
and accuracy of the application. Individuals are now able          Albertans by:
to check their eligibility for the PDD program, submit
supporting documents online and save their application             •   allowing upload of documents
so they can come back to it later. Ministry staff are also             when submitting an application;
able to initiate applications on behalf of a PDD individual        •   providing alerts and
when requested by the individual or their guardian. The                notifications when information is
new application provides for more consistent                           missing or is inaccurate; and
experiences for Albertans and ministry staff across the            •   ensuring applicant is provided
province using a streamlined and secure platform.                      with more information upfront
                                                                       so that they don’t have to
                                                                       continue with the application if
                                                                       they don’t meet the general
                                                                       eligibility.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                           43
Results Analysis



The new application platform reduces administrative burden by removing manual data entry. It
also saves time for staff who previously had to go back and forth with applicants to complete the
application prior to forwarding it for eligibility determination. The Adaptive Skills Inventory was
released in February 2025 which provides a dynamic digital tool replacing a pdf form. This new tool
enhances usability for ministry staff and reduces the number of steps required to share the
information received from the applicant and their supporters, ensuring a PDD applicant only needs
to tell their story once.

Enhancing needs assessments
In November 2024, the ministry implemented improvements to how needs are assessed for those
accessing the PDD program, including the development of a new online tool for caseworkers to
support assessment and case management. This was based on work completed in 2022 by an
Action Committee consisting of service provider organizations, academia, and government to co-
develop a made-in-Alberta approach to assessment. This Action Committee also considered
findings and recommendations from the 2021 PDD Steering Committee. The new assessment of
needs process takes a flexible approach to gathering information and focuses on individual’s unique
circumstances, needs, aspirations, and strengths to complete planning for appropriate supports and
resources available to the individual. It also assists with PDD case management to better
understand what supports may be required and individuals’ existing supports and resources such
as guardians, family, friends, and access to other community or government programs.

Complex service needs reviews
The ministry has been contracting a third-party to conduct complex needs reviews to inform
continuous improvement of ministry programs and ensure individuals with complex service needs
receive effective support and services. Individuals with Complex Service Needs (CSN) designations
are defined in PDD policy as posing a significant risk, and/or are destructive to themselves, others,
or property. Approximately 10 per cent (or 1,350) of the total PDD caseload is identified as having
CSN (2024-25).

Complex needs reviews increase understanding of best practices when supporting individuals with
complex service needs and encourage better communication, collaboration and service
coordination with individuals, families, guardians, services providers and other ministries. A total
of 82 reviews have been completed since the pilot began in 2022. The department works with the
service providers and individuals to address any findings coming out of each individual review and
to address areas for improvement or best practices that could be applied across the CSN caseload,
including working with other government departments to improve access to other supports such as
mental health and addictions support.
Improving the Family Supports for Children with Disabilities program
The Family Supports for Children with Disabilities (FSCD) program is a legislated program that
works with families of eligible children with disabilities to provide support and services based on
each child and family’s needs. It provides a wide range of proactive supports and services that are
individualized to each eligible child and their family, such as counselling, respite and behavioral and
developmental supports. The goal of the program is for families to have the skills, support and
resources required to care for and promote their child’s development and participation at home
and in their communities.

The ministry invested $259 million in the FSCD program in 2024-25. As at March 2025, the active
FSCD caseload was 18,535.




44                                           Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis



Family Supports for Children with Disabilities program improvements
A new digital platform for the FSCD policy manual was launched in June 2024 to improve
accessibility and navigation, providing a more user-friendly experience for Albertans and FSCD
staff.

In January 2025, service agreements were moved into the new case management system to simplify
the process of creating and approving agreements that outline the supports and services available
to a family. This improvement reduces administrative time for caseworkers, leaving more time to
work with families who need their support.

Addressing FSCD program audit recommendations
In April 2022, Seniors, Community and Social Services accepted recommendations from the Auditor
General’s performance review of the FSCD program and committed to addressing the findings of the
audit. The ministry has:

•   reviewed and updated guides to promote clarity and increase consistency when staff use
    judgement to assess needs and complete support planning;
•   further developed the program training and oversight processes to ensure staff obtain the
    necessary skills and knowledge to complete the assessment of needs and support planning
    consistency; and
•   improved caseworker oversight processes to increase the consistency of the assessment of
    needs and support planning processes.
The ministry has informed the Auditor General the recommendations have been addressed and are
ready for a follow-up assessment of implementation.

Supporting people with disabilities through Family Resource Centres
Family Resource Centres help individuals with disabilities and their families to access and navigate
the variety of disability supports and services available in Alberta. In 2024-25, $412,000 was
provided to four Family Resource Centres across six regions of Alberta:

•   Easter Seals Alberta Society – Calgary and Southern Alberta;
•   Gateway Association – Edmonton;
•   STEPS Society of Red Deer – Central Alberta; and
•   WJS Canada – Northeast and Northwest Alberta.
This funding supported 2,439 families with services including workshops on a variety of topics to
assist individuals and families in accessing services in their agreements, as well as general
navigation and information supports to Albertans.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                    45
Results Analysis



2.3   Implement the cross-ministry Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) Strategic Plan
      2024-2027 to ensure effective supports for Albertans impacted by FASD.

Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Service Networks
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) is a lifelong disability, which may occur when a developing
baby is exposed to alcohol during pregnancy. The Government of Alberta focuses on developing and
delivering community-based solutions, making it easier for people affected by FASD to get the help
they need, at any point during their life.

Twelve regionally based FASD Service Networks deliver FASD awareness, prevention, assessment
and diagnosis and support services for individuals with FASD, their families and caregivers across
the province. These community-led and community-driven FASD Service Networks have each
designed a model of service delivery to meet the unique needs of the individuals and families in
their region. The continuum of services provided by the FASD Service Networks are respectful of
community and cultural diversity, including First Nations, Métis, Inuit and immigrant populations.

In 2024-25, the ministry invested approximately $27.6 million for FASD supports and services.
During the year, approximately 5,900 individuals, their families and caregivers received supports
and services through the FASD Service Network.

The Alberta FASD Strategic Plan 2024-27 was finalized in 2024, in collaboration with 10 cross-
ministry partners including Advanced Education, Children and Family Services, Education, Health,
Indigenous Relations, Justice, Mental Health and Addiction and Public Safety and Emergency
Services. External organizations, such as Alberta Health Services and Alberta Gaming, Liquor and
Cannabis, were also engaged.

The implementation of action items with cross-ministry partners is currently underway. This
includes the establishment of an improved cross-ministry process to enhance strategic plan
collaboration.

2.4   Provide funding to support access to transportation services for low-income and
      vulnerable Albertans.

Low-income transit programs
Many Albertans rely on public transportation to help them get to work, appointments and attend
recreational activities. To help combat high inflation, Alberta’s government introduced additional
funding to provide low-income Albertans with more affordable access to transit service. In
2024-25, Seniors, Community and Social Services provided $13.8 million to 19 municipalities to
subsidize their low-income transit programs, including $12 million for the Cities of Calgary and
Edmonton to support programs in 2024-25 and 2025-26.




46                                          Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Results Analysis



Performance Measure 2.a:
Percentage of participants employed after receiving Career and Employment
Information Services: workshops, exposure courses, job placements, and Disability
Related Employment Supports

                              Prior Years’ Results
                                                                           2024          2024
                                                                          Target        Actual
        2020                  2021               2022              2023

        61%                   66%                75%               68%     65%           67%
Source: Work Outcomes Reporting Project Survey

Description: Career and Employment Information Services (CEIS) help Albertans to understand
the labour market, make informed career decisions, develop realistic education, training and
employment plans and to prepare for, find and maintain work. This performance measure captures
the proportion (per cent) of former CEIS clients who found employment within three months after
completing one of the following CEIS services: Exposure Course, Job Placement, Workshop, and
Disability Related Employment Supports (DRES).

Rationale: This performance measure assesses the impact of CEIS on employability of CEIS clients.
The measure includes the following services: Workshops, Exposure Course, Job Placement, DRES,
and Workforce Development training. They do not include Assessments or other service types not
surveyed via Work Outcomes Reporting Project.

Results and variance explanation: In 2024, 67 per cent of participants reported employment
three months after receiving CEIS. This is a decrease of one percentage point from the 2023 result
of 68 per cent and 2 percentage points above the 2024 target. In 2024, 75 per cent of Albertans
reported they were satisfied or very satisfied with the CEIS services they received.

The variance between percentage of participants employed after receiving employment services in
2024 from 2023 may be explained by continuing changes in Alberta’s labour market. Alberta’s
unemployment rate increased from an average of 5.8 per cent in 2023 to 7.1 per cent in 2024, due
in part to rapid population growth that outpaced job creation. Alberta’s job vacancy rates reached
3.1 per cent as of November 2024, a reduction from 2022 highs, representing a substantial decrease
in job opportunities. Under these weak market conditions, the 2024 result of 67 per cent may
reflect the utility of employment services in helping individuals navigate a tighter labour market.

Those who participated in employment services without obtaining employment may have
transitioned to further education or training, obtained employment that was not captured in
reporting, moved out of Alberta or received financial support from other sources




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                     47
Results Analysis



Outcome Three: Inclusion – Albertans can access social services across the province that
foster their resiliency and support community inclusion and diversity.
Making social services accessible to Albertans across the province ensures they have an
opportunity to remain and be included in their communities.

Key Objectives

3.1   Support municipalities and Metis Settlements to design and deliver preventive social
      programs which help to address key social issues in their communities.

3.2   Support Albertans to age well at home and prevent elder abuse by collaborating with
      community-based seniors-serving organizations, health and other sectors, and all
      orders of government.

3.3   With support from the Premier’s Council on Charities and Civil Society, expand civil
      society’s capacity to address emerging social issues and improve supports for
      Albertans.




48                                          Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                 Results Analysis



3.1    Support municipalities and Metis Settlements to design and deliver preventive social
       programs which help to address key social issues in their communities.

Enhancing community well-being with Family and Community Support Services
The Family and Community Support Services (FCSS) program is a partnership between Seniors,
Community and Social Services, participating municipalities and Metis Settlements to design and
deliver locally-driven preventive social programming that helps meet the changing needs of
vulnerable Albertans and support the well-being of Alberta’s diverse communities. The program
follows an 80/20 funding model, where Seniors, Community and Social Services provides up to
80 per cent of the funding and the municipality or Metis Settlement contributes a minimum of
20 per cent. In 2024-25, the ministry invested $104.3 million in the FCSS program.

In 2024-25, the ministry began implementing the final phase of the FCSS Accountability Framework.
The framework guides local FCSS programs and the ministry in designing and delivering preventive
social services that meet Albertans’ needs now and into the future. The key elements of the FCSS
Accountability Framework are:

•     a common definition of prevention to guide both local        Community Connection Cafes
      FCSS programs at the municipal level and the wider           In 2023*, the Vulcan and Region
      provincial FCSS grant program;                               FCSS ran Community Connection
•     direction on provincial prevention priorities and            Cafes and other seniors programs
      strategies to help guide the work of local FCSS              in Arrowwood, Carmangay,
      programs;                                                    Lomond, Milo, Mossleigh and
                                                                   Vulcan. These programs:
•     a clear governance structure with roles and
      responsibilities for the province and participating          •    assist seniors to apply for
      municipalities and Metis Settlements; and                         benefit programs, including the
•     an outcomes model and key performance measures to                 Alberta Seniors Benefit, and
      demonstrate the impact and value of FCSS in                       receive referrals to other social
      supporting prevention.                                            service providers;
                                                                   •    reduce social isolation by
To implement the final phase of the Framework, the                      helping seniors build
department worked in partnership with the FCSS                          relationships with others in the
Association of Alberta to establish a new shared                        community; and
measurement approach to simplify the reporting process
for participating municipalities and Metis Settlements and         •    provide information about
improve the department’s ability to measure the impact of               volunteer opportunities for
the FCSS program at the provincial level. The new                       seniors in their community.
approach will be implemented in January 2026.
                                                                   The most recent year for which reporting is
                                                                   *

                                                                   available




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                 49
Results Analysis



3.2   Support Albertans to age well at home and prevent elder abuse by collaborating with
      community-based seniors-serving organizations, health and other sectors, and all
      orders of government.

Supporting organizations aiding senior’s independence and well-being

Strengthening senior-serving organizations
Seniors-serving organizations are experiencing capacity and workforce challenges as service
demands rise alongside Alberta’s growing seniors population. In June 2024, Seniors, Community
and Social Services announced an $18 million, three-year investment to strengthen the community-
based seniors serving sector, enabling organizations to expand capacity and enhance supports.

In 2024-25, the ministry continued to support Albertans to age well at home and build capacity
within the community-based seniors-serving sector through Healthy Aging Alberta. Healthy Aging
Alberta is an evolving network of organizations and allies, with the United Way of Calgary and Area
serving as the backbone organization. Healthy Aging Alberta facilitates leadership development,
partnerships, community projects, resource mobilization, workforce planning and collaboration
with government to address key issues affecting seniors. In 2024-25, the Government of Alberta
provided Healthy Aging Alberta with $462,000, as part of a commitment of $1.4 million over three
years, to coordinate and integrate the community-based senior-serving sector.

Providing non-medical supports, social prescribing and assisted transportation for seniors
In 2024-25, $3 million was provided for programs delivering social prescribing for Albertans:
$1 million to Carya in Calgary, $1 million to Edmonton Seniors Coordinating Council and $200,000
each to Fort McMurray, Grande Prairie, Lethbridge, Medicine Hat and Red Deer. Social Prescribing
programs bridge medical and community supports to provide wraparound services to Albertans.

In addition, $2.2 million was provided for the delivery of non-medical supports to enable
individuals to live safely and independently at home or in the community. Examples of non-medical
supports include housekeeping, meal assistance and transportation. Specifically, $2 million was
provided to Healthy Aging Alberta for the expansion of the Home and Community Supports
Program from 20 to 27 rural communities and a grant of $200,000 to Drive Happiness supported
the operations of its volunteer driver transportation program while expanding services in Red Deer
and the surrounding area. Drive Happiness provided over 3,300 rides to over 1,700 seniors in
25 communities in 2024-25. The Provincial Assisted Transportation Project through Healthy Aging
Alberta supports the delivery of community-based assisted transportation to help seniors, older
adults and individuals with disabilities access appointments, activities and events. In 2024-25, the
program expanded to 19 communities and provided over 9,300 rides to over 2,200 Albertans.

Seniors special events and awards
Seniors, Community and Social Services recognized and celebrated the invaluable contributions of
seniors and those who support them through various events and initiatives. The Minister’s Seniors
Service Awards honour individuals, businesses and non-profit organizations that demonstrate
exceptional volunteerism, philanthropy, innovation or outstanding service to seniors. In April 2024,
nine outstanding Albertans and organizations were recognized for their contributions in 2023. In
fall 2025, the ministry will present a combined 2024–2025 Minister’s Seniors Service Awards to
continue celebrating those who make a meaningful difference in the lives of seniors across the
province.




50                                           Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis



Since 1986, Seniors’ Week has been recognized and observed annually during the first full week of
June to celebrate the contributions seniors make to Alberta’s communities. In 2024, Seniors’ Week
was co-hosted and officially launched in Banff, featuring an opening ceremony, live music and a
resource fair highlighting local services. The celebration fostered community engagement and
recognition of seniors’ contributions. At the event, the Town of Banff and its Age-Friendly
Committee received the Age-Friendly Alberta Recognition Award.

Age-Friendly Alberta Recognition Awards acknowledge communities that take meaningful steps to
become more accessible and inclusive for seniors. These efforts enhance infrastructure, services,
and accessibility, strengthening communities, supporting businesses, and improving quality of life
for all Albertans. In addition to the Town of Banff, the municipalities of Innisfail, Okotoks and
Wood Buffalo were also recognized in 2024.

Other annual events that highlight issues affecting seniors include World Elder Abuse Awareness
Day, Alberta Day, the Day of Older Persons in Alberta and Fire Prevention Week. On World Elder
Abuse Awareness Day, the ministry partnered with the Alberta Elder Abuse Awareness Council to
distribute elder abuse toolkits to community partners and to promote the Safe Spaces Program,
reaffirming its commitment to protecting seniors from abuse.

During Alberta Day celebrations, Seniors, Community and Social Services hosted interactive booths
at Alberta House under the theme “Live, Learn, Laugh,” where guests explored seniors’ programs
and services through engaging activities like trivia, heritage mapping and vintage object
identification.

On the Day of Older Persons in Alberta, the ministry honoured the contributions of older adults
through targeted social media messaging, raising awareness of issues such as social inclusion and
access to services.

Lastly, during Fire Prevention Week in October 2024, Seniors, Community and Social Services
collaborated with Municipal Affairs, the Alberta Emergency Management Agency and Caregivers
Alberta to develop Fire Prevention Week presentations and fire safety resources for seniors and
caregivers to help keep them safe and informed.

Support the independence and well-being of older adults through the
implementation of Alberta’s elder abuse prevention strategy
In 2024-25, Seniors, Community and Social Services continued to implement Alberta’s five-year
strategy for preventing and addressing elder abuse in collaboration with community-based senior-
serving organizations. The ministry invested $3.4 million in initiatives to prevent elder abuse and
support those who experience elder abuse, including:

•   reviewing and enhancing elder abuse publications and educational materials, including multiple
    resources translated into 16 different languages;
•   providing grants to the Alberta Elder Abuse Awareness Council to sustain the network of
    coordinated community responses and elder abuse case managers;
•   supporting two dedicated elder abuse shelters in Calgary and Edmonton; and
•   implementing the Safe Spaces Program to support older adults fleeing abuse in rural and
    Indigenous communities.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                      51
Results Analysis



Preventing elder abuse through coordinated community responses
Through the Coordinated Community Responses (CCR) program, local service providers work
together to achieve common goals related to addressing elder abuse. Through this program,
communities hire elder abuse case managers to lead their local CCR and provide supports and
referrals to older adults experiencing abuse. Examples of supports include counselling, dispute
resolution, legal aid, crisis response, health services, shelter services, safe and affordable housing,
court support and financial assistance.

In 2024-25, the department provided $1.2 million to the Alberta Elder Abuse Awareness Council to
expand support from 13 to 20 CCRs in both rural and urban areas across the province. This funding
represents an increase of $400,000 compared to 2023-24. Case managers in these CCRs worked
with over 540 older adults across the province during the year, providing direct services and
supports over 1,500 times and more than 1,200 referrals to other services.

2024-25 survey results for older adults who worked with elder abuse case managers


     Respondents said they had greater awareness of
                                                                                                                 88%
          resources available in the community

               Respondents said they had increased
                                                                                                           86%
                    knowledge of elder abuse

 Respondents felt supported by the case managers                                                           86%


         Respondents said their safety was improved                                                  84%

        Respondents said they built relationships with
                                                                               74%
           supportive people in their community




Responding to the demand for elder abuse shelters and safe spaces
Alberta currently has two shelters for older adults fleeing abuse in Calgary and Edmonton, with a
total 25 beds available across both shelters. In Calgary, Unison Elder Abuse Shelter has 14 shelter
beds. In Edmonton, Sage Seniors Safe House has seven shelter beds, plus four transition suites at a
second location that were added in 2024-25.

In 2024-25, Seniors, Community and Social Services provided a total of $1.8 million to Unison Elder
Abuse Shelter and Sage Seniors Safe House to operate elder abuse shelters and provide intensive
case management supports. This is an increase of $225,000 from 2023-24 to support the operation
of new transition suites by Sage Seniors Safe House. During 2024-25, the elder abuse shelters
provided emergency housing to 91 clients, including 71 new admissions. The shelters worked with
166 clients through their outreach programs and responded to more than 1,300 calls for
information and support. Over 80 per cent of the clients provided with emergency housing or
outreach services were women.




52                                                       Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                         Results Analysis



The Safe Spaces Program aims to expand access to elder abuse shelter spaces in rural and
Indigenous communities across the province where supports for seniors fleeing abuse is less
available. The program approach builds on the existing CCR program. Case managers work with
local seniors’ lodge housing management bodies to find and use appropriate vacant spaces in
seniors’ lodges to shelter seniors escaping abuse. In 2024-25, the ministry provided $435,000 to the
Alberta Elder Abuse Awareness Council to implement the Safe Spaces Program. In collaboration
with key partners, program development occurred in early 2024-25. Following a call for
applications, seven communities were selected to join the program in the fall of 2024: Athabasca,
Camrose, Claresholm/Vulcan, Hinton, Lethbridge, Medicine Hat and Spruce Grove.

Enhancing service provider capacity across the province and within Indigenous communities
In 2024-25, the ministry provided $119,000 to the Alberta Elder Abuse Awareness Council for an
Education and Training Coordinator and $181,000 for two Indigenous Resource Liaisons. These
grants were supported through Alberta’s four-year funding agreement with the federal government
to support Alberta’s ongoing work to end gender-based violence.

The Education and Training Coordinator works collaboratively with the Indigenous Resource
Liaisons to build capacity of CCRs by providing a range of training opportunities for case managers
and service providers, as well as professionals and post-secondary students in related fields.
Indigenous Resource Liaisons raise awareness of elder abuse in Indigenous communities, connect
Indigenous seniors and case managers with cultural resources (such as access to Elders), bridge
connections with key stakeholders and support the development of CCRs and Safe Spaces.

3.3    With support from the Premier’s Council on Charities and Civil Society, expand civil
       society’s capacity to address emerging social issues and improve supports for
       Albertans.

From 2020 to 2023, the Premier’s Council on Charities and Civil Society provided independent
advice to government on its relationship with civil society organizations addressing pressing social
issues across Alberta. The council engaged civil society stakeholders and provided advice to
government through three published advisory reports, available on the Alberta Open Government
Portal:

•     Moving Forward: Charting a Path to Civil Society Recovery (2020);
•     Supporting Women’s Economic Recovery (2021-2022); and
•     Building Momentum for Social Impact (2023).
Having fulfilled its mandate, the Premier’s Council on Charities and Civil Society was officially
dissolved in February 2025.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                      53
Results Analysis



Performance Measure 3.a:
Satisfaction of families/guardians of clients accessing the Persons with
Developmental Disabilities program that services are helping the client to be a part
of their community (biennial survey)

                                Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                                  2024-25         2024-25
      2016-17                2019-20                2021-22                2023-24                 Target          Actual


        89%                    88%                    86%               No survey               No survey        No results
                                                                        conducted1              planned2         available
Source: Persons with Developmental Disabilities (PDD) Family and Guardian Survey
Notes:
1. The 2023-24 survey was postponed to adjust the survey questions to align with program process improvements.
2. This is a biennial survey. Targets are not provided for years when the survey is not conducted.

Description: The Persons with Developmental Disabilities (PDD) program provides supports to
over 13,500 adults with developmental disabilities in Alberta. The services funded by the PDD
program are an important mechanism for achieving successful outcomes for individuals. Families
and guardians' opinions regarding these services, as measured by the biennial PDD
Family/Guardian Satisfaction Survey, are important tools for assessing performance and making
continuous improvements.

This performance measure assesses the satisfaction of families/guardians of adults accessing the
PDD program that services are helping the client to be a part of their community. It is determined
by the percentage of positive responses given to the survey statement: services help them to be part
of the community as much as they want to be.

Rationale: This measure speaks to the ministry’s commitment to increase inclusion for people with
developmental disabilities in their communities.

Results and variance explanation: Results are not available due to the postponement of the
biennial survey. Redevelopment of the survey is underway to align the survey questions with
program improvements, engage with stakeholders, and assess if questions are properly targeted.
This performance measure was not included in the 2025-28 Business Plan and will not be reported
in future Seniors, Community and Social Supports Annual Reports until the survey approach is fully
reviewed, updated and implemented.

Previous survey results and historical data for the PDD program are available on the Alberta Open
Government Data Portal.




54                                                           Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                           Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 3.b:
Seniors’ Sense of Belonging to local Community

                                                        Prior Years’ Results

           2019                        2020                         2021                        2022                         2023

         75.9%                        73.4%                        72.2%                       71.3%                        70.1%
Source: Statistics Canada, Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS)
Note:
The CCHS is typically conducted between January and December of the survey year. Data is collected annually, and results lag by one year.

Description: This indicator tracks the percentage of Albertans aged 65 and older who report a
somewhat strong or very strong sense of belonging to their local community at the time of the
CCHS.

Rationale: This indicator is a proxy for social inclusion and community connectedness, and ties
directly to the ministry’s work related to social isolation, age-friendly communities, addressing
ageism, and aging in community. It provides context on seniors’ engagement with local community
and their quality of life in Alberta.

Results and variance explanation: In 2023, the proportion of Alberta seniors reporting a
somewhat strong or very strong sense of belonging to their local community declined by
1.2 percentage points from 2022, reaching 70.1 per cent. While this represents the lowest level in
five years, the result is consistent with the national average for seniors (70 per cent). The decline
may reflect the ongoing effects of social isolation, loneliness and anxiety stemming from COVID-19
public health restrictions in previous years. Additional research is needed to better understand the
lasting impacts that public health restrictions had on social interactions and how individuals are
reconnecting with community.

Seniors continue to report a stronger sense of belonging compared with younger adult cohorts. In
2023, the proportion of Albertans with a somewhat strong or very strong sense of belonging was
56.5 per cent for those aged 18 to 34, 59.1 per cent for those aged 35 to 49, and 62.5 per cent for
those aged 50 to 64. All age groups, except those aged 50 to 64, experienced a decline in reported
belonging from 2022 to 2023.

Access to data for this indicator lags by approximately one year and is dependent upon ongoing
data collection and analysis by Statistics Canada. 2024 results are anticipated in October 2025,
based on the previous year’s release schedule.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                            55
Results Analysis



Outcome Four: A modernized and re-focused health care system that delivers the highest
quality patient care to all Albertans, including Indigenous Peoples, regardless of where they
reside in the province, and is fiscally sustainable.
Alberta is refocusing the health care system to prioritize patient care and empower frontline health
care workers, including those serving rural, remote and Indigenous communities, to deliver the
highest quality health care.

Note: Outcome Four was originally Outcome Two in the 2024-27 Health Business Plan and has
been renumbered for ease of reporting in this annual report. Only the Key Objectives from the
2024-27 Health Business Plan related to Continuing Care are included in this annual report.

Key Objectives

4.1   Improve patient outcomes and access through the creation of dedicated organizations
      for acute care, continuing care and primary care within a single functioning health care
      system.

4.2   Modernize and transform the continuing care system to improve quality of care,
      increase choice and innovation, shift to enable provision of more care in the
      community, and support the continuing care workforce.




56                                          Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis



4.1     Improve patient outcomes and access through the creation of dedicated organizations
        for acute care, continuing care, and primary care within a single functioning health
        care system.

Refocusing continuing care
To set the conditions for change in the continuing care sector to support Albertans, the Government
of Alberta introduced the Continuing Care Act, which came into effect on April 1, 2024. New
regulations, updated standards and improved licensing processes support clear and consistent
compliance, monitoring and delivery of continuing care in Alberta.

As part of the ongoing Health transformation, Seniors, Community and Social Services became the
ministry responsible for continuing care on December 12, 2024, with the legal establishment of the
new continuing care provincial health agency, Assisted Living Alberta, on April 1, 2025. The
ministry is now the lead for continuing care in Alberta and will ensure all Albertans can access
quality care and services when and where they need it to support their independence and quality of
life. Continuing care services support the health and well-being of individuals and may include non-
medical and clinical assistance for those individuals with unmet needs. There are a variety of
continuing care settings, services and supports available to Albertans depending on an individual’s
health, personal care or accommodation service needs. These services and supports may be
provided in individuals’ homes, community-based service locations such as day programs,
supportive living accommodations and continuing care homes.

In 2024-25, the Government of Alberta continued to transform and modernize the continuing care
system based on the recommendations from the Facility-Based Continuing Care review, the
palliative and end-of-life care engagement and learnings from COVID-19. This included the
continuation of Alberta’s investment of $1 billion over three years (2023-24 to 2025-26), as well as
commitment of more than $634.6 million in the federal Aging with Dignity Funding Agreement over
five years (2023-24 to 2027-28). Alberta’s continuing care transformation work includes ongoing
efforts to allow for the provision of more care in the community, enhanced workforce capacity,
increased choice and innovation, and improved quality of care in the continuing care sector.

Assisted Living Alberta
Assisted Living Alberta, the new public health agency for the continuing care health services sector,
was announced on January 30, 2025 and established as an entity on April 1, 2025. Once operational,
Assisted Living Alberta will align health and non-medical supports and services, increase
continuing care spaces, reduce wait times and provide comprehensive wraparound supports for
Albertans who require different levels and types of care. This includes:

•     seniors in continuing care homes or supportive living accommodations, or those who want to
      continue aging at home but need supports to do so;
•     people with disabilities;
•     individuals experiencing homelessness; and
•     other vulnerable Albertans who require temporary or longer-term care at home or in
      continuing care homes or supportive living accommodations.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                    57
Results Analysis



4.2    Modernize and transform the continuing care system to improve quality of care,
       increase choice and innovation, shift to enable provision of more care in the
       community, and support the continuing care workforce.

Providing continuing care to Albertans
Alberta continues to invest in home and community-based services and supports as part of the
transformation of Alberta’s continuing care system to ensure Albertans are getting the care they
need, when and where they need it.

Expansion of Client Directed Home Care Invoicing
The Client Directed Home Care Invoicing service model provides                                  Home care
Albertans with the option to select the home care service provider of                           program
their choosing and direct how their care is provided. While Client                              In 2024-25, over
Directed Home Care Invoicing does not reflect all home care program                             17 million hours
delivery, the model is available province-wide and continued to                                 were provided
expand to serve more Albertans throughout 2024-25. Of those that                                through the
accessed the unique Client Directed Home Care Invoicing model,                                  publicly-funded
claims processed in 2024-25 reflected 2,023,115 total hours of care                             Home Care
and $67.2 million total care funding through this growing service                               program to over
model, an increase of 118 per cent in total hours and 122 per cent in                           140,000 unique
total funding from the previous year. The continued uptake and                                  home care clients
growth demonstrate the significance of this program in supporting
clients and caregivers with the home care services they require,
particularly in rural settings where the home care workforce is limited.

Home care pilots
In 2024-25, the Government of Alberta provided funding of $2.4 million for four innovative home
and community care pilot projects. In Calgary and Central Zone (Red Deer and Rimbey), the pilots
enable transitions to home from acute care, and in Central Zone support clients and caregivers with
extended hours at adult day programs. With the additional supports and appropriate home and
community care provided by these pilot projects, seniors and adults with disabilities will have the
ability to stay in their homes and communities longer. To date, 371 clients have benefited from
these pilots.

 Average direct care hours per resident day                                 Direct care hours
                                                                            In response to recommendations from the
       Continuing                                                           2021 Facility-Based Continuing Care
       care home            2022-23         2023-24         2024-25         Review, the Government of Alberta
      operator type                                                         provided $136.2 million in 2024-25 to
                                                                            incrementally increase direct hours of care
      Type A                   3.37            3.62            3.70         in continuing care homes. Increasing
                                                                            direct care hours enables staff to provide a
                                                                            higher quality of care, which improves the
      Type B                   2.80            2.99            3.07         quality of life for residents, while at the
 Type A – 24/7 complex scheduled and unscheduled professional and
                                                                            same time, reducing staff stress and
 personal care with registered nurses and health care aides.                burnout.
 Type B – 24/7 scheduled and unscheduled professional and personal care
 with licensed practical nurses and health care aides.
 Note:
 Funded worked hours for Type B settings differ based on levels of care
 (formerly Designated Supportive Living (DSL) 3,4 and 4D). Table reflects
 DSL4 worked care hours per resident day.




58                                                           Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis



The Continuing Care Homes Quality of Life Initiatives Grant
In March 2024, the Government of Alberta announced a grant call for the Continuing Care Homes
Quality of Life Initiatives Grant. This funding was designed to provide Type A and B continuing care
home operators with an opportunity to develop and lead innovative evidence-informed initiatives
to improve resident quality of life by addressing at least one of three priority areas: opportunities
to participate in meaningful activity; access to culturally appropriate care; and mealtime
experiences. Nine projects have been approved for the next two years, totaling $4 million in
2024-25, that will impact the residents at 52 participating continuing care homes across Alberta.
Two of the projects will focus on mealtime experience and seven will focus on meaningful activity.

Supports for caregivers
The Government of Alberta provided $3.7 million in 2024-25 to support and strengthen networks,
resources and connections for caregivers (family or friends caring for loved ones). These
investments included:

•   $1.6 million to Caregivers Alberta to expand programs to serve more caregivers, grow their
    volunteer ambassador program, assist employers to support caregiving employees and
    establish pathways and supports for caregivers to navigate the system to easily connect with
    help;
•   $685,500 to the University of Alberta to design a strategy and implement caregiver-centered
    care in health and social care settings across Alberta; and
•   $1.4 million to the Alzheimer Society of Alberta and Northwest Territories to expand support
    and navigation in communities across the province. This grant will expand and fortify the
    support systems available to persons living with dementia and their caregivers and includes
    four sub-projects: palliative approach and grief support; cultural communities; mobile rural
    navigator team; and dementia supportive communities.

Trauma-informed care
In 2024-25, the Government of Alberta provided $200,000 to the University of Alberta’s Translating
Research in Elder Care research program to plan and host a trauma-informed care policy forum.
The forum was designed to advance a common understanding of trauma, its consequences and
impacts on continuing care home residents and their families and caregivers (including staff), as
well as identify recommendations that could be implemented in Alberta’s continuing care homes to
improve quality of care and dementia care. Trauma-informed care is a universal approach that
recognizes that people have experienced trauma in their lives and adjusts the environment to
prevent re-traumatization. The two-day forum took place in October 2024 with 60 invited
attendees, including continuing care staff and operators, policy and decision-makers from
government and the health services sector, researchers and trauma experts.

Mental health supports for the continuing care workforce
The government recognizes that addressing continuing care workforce wellbeing, retention and
recruitment is required to enable quality care and is committed to address workforce issues
through system transformation. In 2024-25, Alberta’s government supported and expanded
initiatives to improve mental health supports for the continuing care workforce. This included
$2.5 million to the Alberta Continuing Care Association to administer the Care for Staff program.
The Care for Staff program delivered staff-informed projects to support employee mental health
and well-being across Alberta. The Government of Alberta also provided $650,000 to support
workplace mentorship programming and invested another $106,000 in interventions and tools to
support continuing care staff strength and resiliency.



Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                    59
Results Analysis



Growing the continuing care workforce
The Government of Alberta has supported multiple initiatives to increase workforce supply for
health care aides (HCA) and to grow the continuing care workforce. In 2024-25, these investments
included:

•    $666,000, as part of $2 million over three years, to two Indigenous post-secondary institutions
     to develop and deliver First Nations-infused HCA training;
•    $10.7 million in HCA bursaries to decrease financial barriers and support 400 additional
     students to receive HCA training in continuing care;
•    $600,000 to Alberta Education to support HCA dual credit programming for Alberta high school
     students;
•    $2.2 million to pilot alternative pathways to HCA programming and assist more Albertans to
     become HCAs in continuing care;
•    $1.5 million to support the review of the Alberta HCA curriculum, led by the College of Licensed
     Practical Nurses of Alberta to prepare HCA graduates with the knowledge, skills and abilities
     necessary for practice; and
•    $84 million in continuing care transformation funding to support HCA wage increases and
     alignment, including $53 million to maintain the COVID-19 wage top-up for continuing care
     home HCAs and $31 million to align home care HCA wages.

Continuing Care Capital Program
Through the health refocusing, the Continuing Care Capital Program became the responsibility of
Seniors, Community and Social Services.

The reorganization has enabled a comprehensive review of continuing care capital, aligning it more
closely with social housing capital initiatives to identify potential synergies. This strategic
alignment has resulted in some delays in capital spending as integration efforts progress. Over
$200 million was spent in 2024-25 for new and modernized continuing care spaces.

Moving forward, the program will aim to modernize existing aging and/or outdated continuing care
homes, develop culturally appropriate continuing care spaces to support Indigenous groups and
organizations, enable innovative approaches and add new continuing care spaces in priority areas
across the province. A total of 2,252 continuing care home spaces were under construction as of
March 31, 2025.




60                                            Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                            Results Analysis



Continuing care home spaces under construction as of March 31, 2025

                                                                                                   Continuing care home
    Community                                            Facility                                     spaces under
                                                                                                       construction

 Calgary                   AgeCare Aspen                                                                214 (+178)

 Calgary                   AgeCare Shawnessy                                                            270 (+43)

 Calgary                   Bethany Calgary Redevelopment                                                   420

 Calgary                   Bridgeland Riverview Complex Care                                               198

 Calgary                   Swan Evergreen Village Retirement Community                                     48

 Calgary                   Wing Kei Village Phase I                                                        149

 Chestermere               AgeCare Chestermere                                                             207

 Edmonton                  Norwood (Gene Zwozdesky)                                                        116

 Medicine Hat              Haven of Rest of Medicine Hat                                                   124

 Okotoks                   Foothills Country Hospice                                                        8

 Oyen                      Oyen Lodge/Supportive Living                                                    14

 Sherwood Park             Sherwood Care                                                                   223

 Trochu                    Trochu Supportive Living                                                        40

                                                                                           Total          2,252
Note:
AgeCare projects (Aspen and Shawnessy) were awarded the additional spaces (shown in brackets).




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                          61
Results Analysis



Performance Measure 4a:
Percentage of clients moved to continuing care homes1 within 30 days of being
assessed

                                 Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                                       2024-25                 2024-25
                                                                                                        Target                  Actual
      2020-21                 2021-22                  2022-23                 2023-24

       61.3%                   65.6%                   64.1%                   62.5%2                   66.0%                   63.0%
Source: Alberta Health Services. Data are extracted from Meditech and Strata Health Pathways
Notes:
1. Includes long-term care homes (type A) and designated supportive living (type B) but excludes hospices (type C).
2. Since May 2023, some zones have been unable to report the data that supports the calculation of this provincial indicator due to the launch
of Connect Care. As a result, the data to support the provincial percentage of clients moved to continuing care within 30 days of being assessed
is not complete to the end of 2023-24.

Description: This measure monitors the timeliness of access to continuing care homes in Alberta,
as indicated by the wait times experienced by clients who move into a continuing care home within
30 days of being assessed.

Rationale: This measure speaks to the ministry’s commitment to provide access to a continuing
care home as soon as possible after being assessed, supporting the delivery of highest quality client
care regardless of where they reside in the province.

Results and variance explanation: The 2024-25 result of 63.0 per cent is higher than the 62.5
per cent reported in 2023-24 and shows an increase in the percentage of clients who moved into a
continuing care home within 30 days of being assessed. The preliminary result for 2024-25 is three
percentage points below target.

Investments have been made in home and community care and the number of available continuing
care home spaces is increasing as additional new spaces are identified and planned for. Together,
these investments will provide additional capacity to enable Albertans who need continuing care
homes the ability to access them in a timelier manner.




62                                                              Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis




Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology
Performance Measure 1.a:
     Median time between when an Assured Income for the Severely Handicapped (AISH)
     application is ready for medical adjudication and an eligibility decision is made
     (in weeks)

This performance measure captures the median time (in weeks) between when an Assured Income
for the Severely Handicapped (AISH) application is deemed ready for medical adjudication (the
applicant has met all the criteria for general eligibility and submitted all documents required to
determine their medical eligibility) and when the medical eligibility decision is made.

The information needed to generate this performance measure is captured in the Treatment of
Income (TOI) system. Both the dates when an application is deemed ready for adjudication and
when a medical eligibility decision is made are entered into the TOI system. The result for this
measure is generated in four steps using computer scripts:

     1. Identify all medical eligibility decisions that were made in a given fiscal year.
     2. Determine the time it took to reach the individual medical eligibility decisions (from when
        the applications were deemed ready for adjudication to when the medical eligibility
        decision was made).
     3. Arrange the time it took to reach the individual eligibility decisions from least to greatest.
     4. Obtain the result for the performance measure by identifying the middle value (if there is an
        odd number of eligibility decisions) or by calculating the average of the two middle values
        (if there is an even number of eligibility decisions).

Source: Treatment of Income (TOI) System




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                     63
Results Analysis



Performance Measure 1.b:
     Online Seniors Financial Assistance (SFA) application utilization

Data for this measure is collected by the Seniors Program Delivery Branch in the Seniors Division.
The result for this measure is calculated by dividing the total number of first-time applications
received online (numerator) by the total number of first-time applications received (denominator).
Online application methods include authenticated and non-authenticated applications.
Authenticated refers to Seniors’ Financial Assistance (SFA) applications made online using an
Alberta.ca verified account. Non-authenticated refers to SFA applications made online using the in-
browser fillable form. The measure excludes online applications from seniors who have previously
applied through any method, and former Assured Income for the Severely Handicapped recipients
who are automatically enrolled at age 65.

First-time SFA application includes applications made online and applications submitted by mail,
fax and hand-delivery. Applications received via any of the paper methods are uploaded and
attached to an applicant’s file as an electronic record. Data related to the application, including the
method of application, is stored in the applicant’s file in the Alberta Seniors Benefit database. Data
is extracted by a query against the database for first-time SFA applications received within the fiscal
year. The query results are analyzed to confirm the total number of first-time applicants, and the
total number of first-time applicants who applied using the online options in the fiscal year.

Information on SFA application method is regularly shared and monitored by the Seniors Program
Delivery Branch.

Source: Seniors, Community and Social Services, Alberta Seniors Benefit database




64                                                             Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                          Results Analysis



Performance Measure 1.c:
     New affordable housing units and rental subsidies available for Albertans with low
     income

Data for this measure is collected by the Housing Operations and Housing Capital Program
branches in the Housing Division. The result for this measure is calculated in three steps:
1. Calculate the total number of new affordable housing units by adding the total number of newly
   built units and the total number of regenerated units completed in a fiscal year.

          o    Affordable housing is defined as rental housing for persons in “core housing need”
               provided on a rent-geared-to-income basis (i.e., the amount of rent to be paid by tenants
               is based on the amount of income earned, often as a percentage of the tenant’s income).
               A household is considered in “core housing need” if it falls below at least one of the
               adequacy, affordability, or suitability standards, and spends 30 per cent or more of its
               total before-tax income on housing.
          o    A newly built unit is defined as one new unit of housing that has been built within a
               larger structure such as a house, apartment, mobile home, or group of rooms where a
               person or family eat, live, and sleep.
          o    A regenerated unit is defined as an existing unit of housing that has undergone a
               significant refurbishment to improve the interior and/or exterior and upgrade the unit.
               Upgrading can apply to finishes, materials and/or have the housing comply with
               building codes or meet/exceed current standard minimums. The existing unit has been
               built within a larger structure such as a house, apartment, mobile home, or group of
               rooms where a person or family eat, live, and sleep.
          o    The number of new and regenerated affordable housing units are based on completed
               capital projects. Units are recognized as completed when the occupancy permit has
               been issued. Capital project information is tracked and retained in the internal HOME
               system.
     2. Calculate the total number of rental subsidies by subtracting the total number of households
        supported through the rent supplement program at the start of the fiscal year (April 1) from
        the total number of households supported through the rent supplement program at the end
        of the fiscal year (March 31).

          o    The number of households assisted through rent subsidies is based on incremental
               change in households supported through the Rental Assistance Benefit, Temporary
               Rental Assistance Benefit and the Private to Landlord Rent Supplement programs.
          o    Information on rental subsidies is provided by housing management bodies. This
               information is added to the internal HOME system following a validation process.
3. Calculate the entire inventory of affordable housing added in a fiscal year by adding the sub-
   total from step one (total number of new affordable housing units) and the sub-total from step
   two (total number of rental subsidies).

Source: Seniors, Community and Social Services; HOME system




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                       65
Results Analysis



Performance Measure 2.a:
     Percentage of participants employed after receiving Career and Employment
     Information Services: workshops, exposure courses, job placements, and Disability
     Related Employment Supports

The data for the metric is collected through the Work Outcomes Reporting Project Survey, which is
conducted monthly by an independent consultant.

Participants for the survey are selected by using stratified random sampling method applied to
former CEIS clients three months after they had received CEIS (Exposure Course, Job Placement,
Workshop, or Disability Related Employment Supports (DRES)). However, a census approach is
applied when the program leaver population size is small. The survey is either completed online or
by phone.

This performance metric is based on the answers given to the following two questions:

     1. What is your current main activity?
     2. Have you been employed at any time since you participated in CEIS?
The performance metric for each calendar year (January 1 – December 31) is calculated by dividing
the weighted sum of the number of participants employed (i.e. “employed” or “self-employed” to
Q1, or “Yes” to Q2) by the weighted sum of the responses for all program participants who left the
program between September 1 to August 31 in the following year.

These CEIS clients are surveyed during the calendar year period (between January 1 and
December 31). The results from the random sample are weighted to more accurately represent the
population of all program participants.

Source: Income Support Work Outcomes Reporting Project Survey




66                                                         Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                             Results Analysis



Performance Measure 3.a:
     Satisfaction of families/guardians of clients accessing the Persons with Developmental
     Disabilities program that services are helping the client to be a part of their community
     (biennial survey)

The Persons with Developmental Disabilities (PDD) Family/Guardian Survey collects data for this
performance measure. This survey is conducted biennially.

Survey administration is typically between November and December biennially. All guardians
(often family) of adults with developmental disabilities who received PDD services as of October in
the reporting year are invited to participate in the survey.

Guardians with valid email addresses receive an email from the ministry inviting them to
participate in the PDD Family/Guardian survey. The email includes a link to the survey, as well as a
toll-free number guardians can call to complete the survey over the phone. Guardians without email
addresses and/or phone numbers receive an invitation by mail to participate in the survey via a
phone call or mail. Guardians who do not complete or schedule an appointment to complete the
survey receive follow-up calls until a minimally acceptable number of responses are obtained for
each Alberta region (South, Calgary, Central, Edmonton, Northwest and Northeast). Before
completing the survey, respondents are told of the survey's intention, voluntary nature of their
involvement and confidentiality of the information they will provide. Any respondent who requests
to be contacted at a more convenient time is accommodated.

This performance measure is derived based on the level of agreement with the following statement:

          “Overall, I am satisfied that the person’s services help him/her to be a part of the community
          as much as he/she wants to be.”

For this statement, respondents select from a scale with the following response options: strongly
agree, agree, somewhat agree, somewhat disagree, disagree, strongly disagree, don’t know, and does
not apply.

The performance measure is calculated by dividing the total number of ‘agree’ responses (strongly
agree, agree, and somewhat agree responses) by the total number of respondents and then
multiplying the quotient by 100. Cases with no response or responses of don’t know or does not
apply are treated as invalid and excluded from the calculation. The results are weighted to
represent each region’s proportion of the province’s population.

                                              ∑ (strongly agree + agree + somewhat agree)
Performance Measure =                                                                                  × 100
                                  ∑ (all respondents) - ∑ (no responses + don't know + does not apply)

Source: Persons with Developmental Disabilities (PDD) Family and Guardian Survey




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                           67
Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 3.b:
     Seniors’ sense of belonging to local community

Data for this indicator is obtained from the Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS) conducted
by Statistics Canada. The CCHS is a sample survey with a cross-sectional design that collects
information related to health status, health care utilization and health determinants for the
Canadian population. Data is collected directly from survey respondents using computer assisted
telephone interview software. Response to the survey is voluntary. The CCHS covers the population
12 years of age and over living in the ten provinces and the three territorial capitals. Excluded from
the survey's coverage are:

•    persons living on reserves and other Aboriginal settlements in the provinces;
•    full-time members of the Canadian Forces;
•    the institutionalized population;
•    children aged 12-17 that are living in foster care; and
•    persons living in the Quebec health regions of Région du Nunavik and Région des Terres-Cries-
     de-la-Baie-James.
The survey question on sense of belonging to local community is rated on a four-point scale, with
responses being:
•    very weak;
•    somewhat weak;
•    somewhat strong; and
•    very strong.
The percentage of Alberta seniors reporting a positive sense of belonging to local community is
calculated by dividing the estimated number of individuals aged 65 and older who report their
sense of belonging to their local community as being very strong or somewhat strong (numerator)
by the estimated number of individuals aged 65 and older (denominator), based on the Alberta
sample. The sample data are weighted to enable tabulation of estimates at the provincial level of
aggregation. Census population counts are used to produce the population projection counts.

Source: Statistics Canada Canadian Community Health Survey (Table: 13-10-0096-01)




68                                                           Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                          Results Analysis



Performance Measure 4.a:
     Percentage of clients moved to continuing care homes within 30 days of being assessed

Continuing care homes (CCH)1 refers to the level of care that provides health and support services
appropriate to meet the client’s assessed unmet needs (i.e., Designated Supportive Living Level 3 or
4, 4-Dementia or Long-Term Care).

Assessed and Approved date refers to the date the client is placed on the waitlist for CCH1 following
the completion of the assessment and approval process.



                                          # of clients moved to a CCH1 from community within 30 days
                                                       of their assessed and approved date2
             % Community = Total # of clients admitted to a continuing care home × 100
                                         during the reporting period


% Acute/Sub − acute care =

# of clients moved to a CCH1 from acute/sub−acute care within 30 days of their assessed & approved date
                                                                                                        × 100
             Total # of clients admitted to a continuing care home during the reporting period




                # of clients moved to a CCH1 within 30 days of their assessed and approved date
% Total =                                                                                         × 100
                Total # of clients admitted to a continuing care home during the reporting period




Source: Alberta Health Services. Data are extracted from Meditech and Strata health Pathways
Notes:
1. Includes continuing care homes of type A (long-term care) and type B (designated supportive living) but excludes community hospices
(type C).
2. # of clients moved to a CCH1 within 30 days of their assessed and approved date = # clients moved to a CCH1 from home + # of clients moved
to a CCH1 from acute care.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                           69
Financial Information




Financial Information

Year Ended March 31, 2025

Table of Contents
     Reporting Entity and Method of Consolidation ................................................................................ 71
     Ministry Financial Highlights.................................................................................................................... 72
           Statement of Revenues and Expenses (unaudited) ................................................................. 72
           Revenue and Expense Highlights .................................................................................................... 73
           Expenses – Directly Incurred Detailed by Object (unaudited) ........................................... 74
     Supplemental Financial Information ..................................................................................................... 75
           Tangible Capital Assets (unaudited).............................................................................................. 75
           Tangible Capital Assets (unaudited).............................................................................................. 76
     Financial Statements of Other Reporting Entities ........................................................................... 77
           Alberta Social Housing Corporation .............................................................................................. 78
           Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee Estates and Trusts..........................................102
     Other Financial Information ................................................................................................................... 125
           Statement of Remissions, Compromises, and Write-offs (unaudited) ..........................126
           Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited) ................................................................................................ 127
           Trust Funds Under Administration (unaudited) ...................................................................130




70                                                                       Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                    Financial Information




Reporting Entity and Method of Consolidation
The financial information is prepared in accordance with government's stated accounting policies,
which are based on Canadian Public Sector Accounting Standards.

The reporting entity is the ministry for which the Minister is accountable. The accounts of the
ministry, which includes the department and the Alberta Social Housing Corporation making up the
ministry, are consolidated using the line-by-line method.

Under this method, accounting policies of the consolidated entities are adjusted to conform to those
of the government and the results of each line item in their financial statements (revenue, expense,
assets, and liabilities) are included in government's results. Revenue and expense, capital, investing
and financing transactions and related asset and liability balances between the consolidated
entities have been eliminated.

A list of the individual entities making up the ministry is shown on the "Management's
Responsibility for Reporting" statement included in this annual report.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                      71
Financial Information




Ministry Financial Highlights
Statement of Revenues and Expenses (unaudited)
End of the year March 31, 2025

                                                             2025                  2024               Change from
                                                    Budget          Actual         Actual          Budget   2024 Actual
                                                 (Restated)                      (Restated)
                                                                 In thousands
Revenues
  Government transfers
     Federal and other government grants        $    406,171 $       355,500 $      336,011    $     (50,671) $     19,489
     Internal government transfers                       200             187            122              (13)           65
  Premiums, fees and licenses                          5,000           6,821          5,220            1,821         1,601
  Investment income                                    2,730           7,917          6,791            5,187         1,126
  Other revenue                                       49,778          43,633         72,326           (6,145)      (28,693)
  Ministry total                                     463,879         414,058        420,470          (49,821)       (6,412)
  Inter-ministry consolidation adjustments            (3,734)         (5,552)        (3,602)          (1,818)       (1,950)
 Adjusted ministry total                             460,145         408,506        416,868          (51,639)       (8,362)

Expenses - directly incurred

Programs
  Ministry Support Services                            33,753          32,542        30,192           (1,211)        2,350
  Employment and Income Support                       792,914         984,309       862,730          191,395       121,579
  Assured Income for the Severely Handicapped       1,646,630       1,673,226     1,564,226           26,596       109,000
  Disability Services                               1,599,488       1,636,470     1,554,623           36,982        81,847
  Homeless and Outreach Support Services              212,922         256,109       215,762           43,187        40,347
  Community Supports and Family Safety                136,171         135,105       132,765           (1,066)        2,340
  Seniors Services                                     28,551          25,506        23,005           (3,045)        2,501
  Alberta Seniors Benefit                             506,777         493,814       474,748          (12,963)       19,066
  Housing                                              10,960          12,766        11,427            1,806         1,339
  Public Guardian and Trustee Services                 27,893          27,853        25,807              (40)        2,046
  Continuing Care                                     422,092         341,917        89,355          (80,175)      252,562
  Services Provided to Other Ministries                 2,634           2,073         1,718             (561)          355
  Disaster Recovery & Emergency Assistance                -            15,224        53,683           15,224       (38,459)
  Affordability Supports and Inflation Relief             -               285       192,749              285      (192,464)
  Alberta Social Housing Corporation                  474,690         357,527       329,027         (117,163)       28,500
                                                    5,895,475       5,994,726     5,561,817           99,251       432,909
Debt Servicing
                                                          -               -               4                -           (4)
     Ministry total                                 5,895,475       5,994,726     5,561,821           99,251      432,905
     Inter-ministry consolidation adjustments         (25,634)       (126,248)      (62,895)        (100,614)     (63,353)
     Adjusted ministry total                        5,869,841       5,868,478     5,498,926           (1,363)     369,552

Annual deficit                                  $ (5,409,696) $ (5,459,972) $ (5,082,058)      $     (50,276) $   (377,914)




72                                                   Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                   Financial Information



Revenue and Expense Highlights
Revenues
   •     Total revenues in 2024-25 were $414.0 million which is a decrease of $49.8 million
            from budget and a decrease of $6.4 million from 2023-24.
   •        Transfers from the Government of Canada totalled $355.5 million, a decrease of
            $50.7 million from the budget. This was primarily due to recognized federal Aging
            with Dignity funding that was significantly lower than originally budgeted.
   •        Other revenue totalled $43.6 million, a decrease of $28.7 million from prior year. This
            was primarily due to prior year expenditure refunds from Affordability Supports and
            Inflation Relief and Persons with Developmental Disabilities (PDD) service providers.
Expenses
   •     Total expenses in 2024-25 were $6.0 billion, which is an increase of $99.3 million
            from the budget and an increase of $433.0 million from 2023-24.
   •        Expenses for Employment and Income Support were higher than budget by
            $191.4 million. This was primarily due to an increase in caseload in the Income
            Support program as a result of higher unemployment that is partially offset by slightly
            lower cost per case. In addition, there was also related increased staffing and
            program delivery costs.
   •        Expenses for Assured Income for the Severely Handicapped were higher than
            2023-24 by $109.0 million. This was primarily due to increase in caseload and cost
            per case.
   •        Expenses for Disability Services were higher than 2023-24 by $81.8 million. This was
            primarily due to increased spending for Persons with Developmental Disabilities
            (PDD) for contracted services. In addition, there was an increase in caseload and
            cost per case for PDD and Family Support for Children with Disabilities.
   •        Expenses for Homeless and Outreach Support Services were higher than budget by
            $43.2 million. This was primarily due to additional approved homeless initiatives
            including transitional housing, Winter Emergency Response, Navigation Centres and
            the new federally funded Unsheltered Homelessness and Encampments Initiatives.
   •        Expenses for Alberta Seniors Benefit were higher than 2023-24 by $19.1 million.
            This was primarily due to a net increase in caseload and cost per case.
   •        Expenses for Continuing Care were higher than 2023-24 by $252.6 million. The
            increase is primarily due to new Continuing Care Capital Program modernization
            projects and new capital grant funding agreements.
   •        Expenses for Disaster Recovery & Emergency Assistance were lower than 2023-24
            by $38.5 million. This was primarily due to fewer emergency evacuation payments
            required to assist Albertans in recovering from wildfire disasters compared to the
            prior year.
   •        Expenses for Affordability Supports and Inflation Relief were lower than 2023-24 by
            $192.5 million. This was primarily due to the affordability program, payments to
            eligible Albertans to assist with the rising cost of living and inflation, ending in
            2023-24.
   •        Expenses for Alberta Social Housing Corporation were lower than budget by
            $117.2 million. This was primarily due to less capital grants as a result of delays in
            implementing several programs and projects.



Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                     73
Financial Information



Expenses – Directly Incurred Detailed by Object (unaudited)


                                                   2025 Actual
                                                    In thousands



                                                                                                Grants
                                                                                              $4,366,636
                                                                                                72.8%

     Salaries, wages and
     employee benefits
           $359,844
             6.0%


           Other
           $3,514
            0.1%




         Amortization of
         tangible capital
              assets
             $54,243
               0.9%

                            Supplies and
                              services
                             $1,210,489
                               20.2%



     •          The ministry's largest operating expense was grants, which made up 72.8 per cent of
                total operating expenses. In 2024-25, nearly $4.4 billion was provided to support
                individuals, organizations and communities. The majority of funding was for the
                Assured Income for the Severely Handicapped, Employment and Income Support,
                Alberta Seniors Benefit and Disability Services programs.
     •          Supplies and services of $1.2 billion (20.2 per cent) was largely spent on service
                provider contracts in the Persons with Developmental Disabilities program as well as
                training and workshops in the Employment and Income Support program.
     •          Salaries, wages and employee benefit expenses totalled $359.8 million (6.0 per cent)
                and were primarily for front line delivery of ministry programs and to administer grant
                programs.
     •          The remainder of ministry expenses totalled $57.7 million (1.0 per cent) and were
                classified as amortization of tangible capital assets ($54.2 million) and other
                expenses ($3.5 million).




74                                              Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                        Financial Information




Supplemental Financial Information
Tangible Capital Assets (unaudited)
                                                                                        Computer
                                                                                        Hardware
                                                                                          and                       2025             2024
                                         Land            Buildings      Equipment (1)   Software      Other (2)     Total            Total

Estimated useful life                   Indefinite       10-50 years     3-40 years      3-10 years 3-50 years
                                                                                        In thousands



Historical Cost (3)
Beginning of year                      $ 174,427 $ 2,452,533 $                 4,212 $       25,992 $ 3,168         2,660,332 $      2,584,615
Additions (4)                                601      37,217                     334          6,819      51            45,022           75,798
Transfers and adjustments (5)                  -      16,528                     (25)             -    (983)           15,520           11,689
Disposals, including write-downs (6)        (330)     (2,951)                      -              -       -            (3,281)         (11,770)
                                       $ 174,698 $ 2,503,327 $                 4,521 $       32,811 $ 2,236 $       2,717,593 $      2,660,332
Accumulated Amortization
Beginning of year                                    -     1,216,342           2,628         10,792     2,147       1,231,909        1,187,287
Amortization expense                                 -        53,335             170            711        27          54,243           52,093
Transfers and adjustments (5)                        -             -               2              -       (12)            (10)               -
Effect of disposals including
  write-downs                                        -        (2,057)              -              -         -          (2,057)          (7,471)
                                                     -     1,267,620           2,800         11,503     2,162       1,284,085        1,231,909

Net book value at March 31, 2025 $ 174,698 $ 1,235,707 $                       1,721 $       21,308 $       74 $    1,433,508

Net book value at March 31, 2024
                                       $ 174,427 $ 1,236,191 $                 1,584 $       15,200 $ 1,021                      $   1,428,423


(1) Equipment includes office equipment and furniture, and other equipment.



(2) Other tangible capital assets include leasehold improvements (amortized over the life of the lease).


(3) Historical cost includes work-in-progress and asset retirement costs for tangible capital assets still in productive use.



(4) Additions include non-cash acquisitions totalling $618 comprised of transfers of tangible capital assets from other entities $3 (2024: $0)

   and donated tangible capital assets $615 (2024: $22).

(5) Adjustments relate to accounting policy alignments and reclassifications between capital asset categories.


(6) Disposals include non-cash disposals totalling $1,625 comprised of transfers of tangible capital assets to other entities $1,001 (2024 -

   $0) and grant-in-kind of $624 (2024: $3,975).




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                               75
Financial Information



Tangible Capital Assets (unaudited)


                               Net Book Value as of March 31, 2025
                                           In thousands

                                                                                       Computer hardware &
                                                                                            software
                                                                                             $21,308
                                                                                              1.5%

                                                                                               Other
                                                                                               $1,795
                                                                                                0.1%

                                                                                                Land
                                                                                              $174,698
                                                                                               12.2%




             Buildings
            $1,235,707
              86.2%



     •        Net book value of buildings providing housing as of March 31, 2025, was $1.2 billion,
              which accounts for 86.2 per cent of the total tangible capital assets balance.
              Buildings increased by $50.8 million from the prior year, which is primarily attributed
              to the addition of various housing projects for capital development and maintenance
              renewal.
     •        Net book value of land providing housing as of March 31, 2025, was $174.7 million,
              which accounts for 12.2 per cent of the total tangible capital assets balance. Land
              increased by $0.3 million from the prior year, which is primarily attributed to a land
              donation which is partially offset by nominal sum disposal of properties to housing
              providers.




76                                            Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                             Financial Information




Financial Statements of Other Reporting Entities
Table of Contents
Index of Audited Financial Statements
        Alberta Social Housing Corporation .............................................................................................. 78
        Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee Estates and Trusts..........................................102




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                               77
Financial Information



Alberta Social Housing Corporation
Financial Statements
Table of Contents

         Independent Auditor’s Report ......................................................................................................... 79

         Statement of Operations ..................................................................................................................... 82

         Statement of Financial Position ....................................................................................................... 83

         Statement of Change in Net Debt..................................................................................................... 84

         Statement of Cash Flows ..................................................................................................................... 85

         Notes the Financial Statements ....................................................................................................... 86

         Schedule 1 – Expenses – Detailed by Object ............................................................................. 100

         Schedule 2 – Related Party Transactions................................................................................... 101




78                                                                     Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                    Financial Information




Independent Auditor’s Report


To the Minister of Assisted Living and Social Services

Report on the Financial Statements


Opinion
I have audited the financial statements of Alberta Social Housing Corporation (the Corporation),
which comprise the statement of financial position as at March 31, 2025, and the statements of
operations, change in net debt, and cash flows for the year then ended, and notes to the financial
statements, including a summary of significant accounting policies.

In my opinion, the accompanying financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of the Corporation as at March 31, 2025, and the results of its operations, its
changes in net debt, and its cash flows for the year then ended in accordance with Canadian public
sector accounting standards.

Basis for opinion
I conducted my audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards. My
responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor's Responsibilities for the
Audit of the Financial Statements section of my report. I am independent of the Corporation in
accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to my audit of the financial statements in
Canada, and I have fulfilled my other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
I believe that the audit evidence I have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for
my opinion.

Other information
Management is responsible for the other information. The financial statements of the Corporation
are included in the Annual Report of the Ministry of Seniors, Community and Social Services. The
other information comprises the information included in the Annual Report of the Ministry of
Seniors, Community and Social Services relating to the Corporation, but does not include the
financial statements of the Corporation and my auditor’s report thereon. The Annual Report of the
Ministry of Seniors, Community and Social Services is expected to be made available to me after the
date of this auditor’s report.

My opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and I do not express
any form of assurance conclusion thereon.

In connection with my audit of the financial statements, my responsibility is to read the other
information identified above and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially
inconsistent with the financial statements or my knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise
appears to be materially misstated.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                      79
Financial Information



If, based on the work I will perform on this other information, I conclude that there is a material
misstatement of this other information, I am required to communicate the matter to those charged
with governance.

Responsibilities of management and those charged with governance for the financial
statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements in
accordance with Canadian public sector accounting standards, and for such internal control as
management determines is necessary to enable the preparation of the financial statements that are
free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.

In preparing the financial statements, management is responsible for assessing the Corporation’s
ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern
and using the going concern basis of accounting unless an intention exists to liquidate or to cease
operations, or there is no realistic alternative but to do so.

Those charged with governance are responsible for overseeing the Corporation’s financial
reporting process.

Auditor's responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements
My objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a
whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an
auditor's report that includes my opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is
not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing
standards will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from
fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably
be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial
statements.

As part of an audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards, I exercise
professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit. I also:
• Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due
    to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain
    audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion. The risk of
    not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from
    error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the
    override of internal control.
• Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit
    procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an
    opinion on the effectiveness of the Corporation’s internal control.
• Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting
    estimates and related disclosures made by management.
• Conclude on the appropriateness of management’s use of the going concern basis of accounting
    and, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to
    events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Corporation’s ability to continue as a
    going concern. If I conclude that a material uncertainty exists, I am required to draw attention
    in my auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the financial statements or, if such
    disclosures are inadequate, to modify my opinion. My conclusions are based on the audit



80                                           Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Financial Information



    evidence obtained up to the date of my auditor’s report. However, future events or conditions
    may cause the Corporation to cease to continue as a going concern.
•   Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements, including
    the disclosures, and whether the financial statements represent the underlying transactions
    and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation.

I communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the planned
scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in
internal control that I identify during my audit.




[Original signed by W. Doug Wylie FCPA, FCMA, ICD.D]
Auditor General


June 5, 2025
Edmonton, Alberta




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                        81
Financial Information




Statement of Operations
Alberta Social Housing Corporation
Year ended March 31, 2025




82                                   Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                   Financial Information




Statement of Financial Position
Alberta Social Housing Corporation
As at March 31, 2025




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                     83
Financial Information




Statement of Change in Net Debt
Alberta Social Housing Corporation
Year Ended March 31, 2025




84                                   Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                   Financial Information




Statement of Cash Flows
Alberta Social Housing Corporation
Year ended March 31, 2025




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                     85
Financial Information




Notes the Financial Statements
Alberta Social Housing Corporation
March 31, 2025




86                                   Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                   Financial Information



Alberta Social Housing Corporation
Notes the Financial Statements (Cont’d)
March 31, 2025




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                     87
Financial Information



Alberta Social Housing Corporation
Notes the Financial Statements (Cont’d)
March 31, 2025




88                                        Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                   Financial Information



Alberta Social Housing Corporation
Notes the Financial Statements (Cont’d)
March 31, 2025




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                     89
Financial Information



Alberta Social Housing Corporation
Notes the Financial Statements (Cont’d)
March 31, 2025




90                                        Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                   Financial Information



Alberta Social Housing Corporation
Notes the Financial Statements (Cont’d)
March 31, 2025




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                     91
Financial Information



Alberta Social Housing Corporation
Notes the Financial Statements (Cont’d)
March 31, 2025




92                                        Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                   Financial Information



Alberta Social Housing Corporation
Notes the Financial Statements (Cont’d)
March 31, 2025




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                     93
Financial Information



Alberta Social Housing Corporation
Notes the Financial Statements (Cont’d)
March 31, 2025




94                                        Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                   Financial Information



Alberta Social Housing Corporation
Notes the Financial Statements (Cont’d)
March 31, 2025




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                     95
Financial Information



Alberta Social Housing Corporation
Notes the Financial Statements (Cont’d)
March 31, 2025




96                                        Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                   Financial Information



Alberta Social Housing Corporation
Notes the Financial Statements (Cont’d)
March 31, 2025




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                     97
Financial Information



Alberta Social Housing Corporation
Notes the Financial Statements (Cont’d)
March 31, 2025




98                                        Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                   Financial Information




Alberta Social Housing Corporation
Notes the Financial Statements (Cont’d)
March 31, 2025




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                     99
Financial Information




Schedule 1 – Expenses – Detailed by Object
Alberta Social Housing Corporation
March 31, 2025




100                                  Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                   Financial Information




Schedule 2 – Related Party Transactions
Alberta Social Housing Corporation
March 31, 2025




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                    101
Financial Information



Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee Estates and Trusts
Financial Statements
Table of Contents

         Management’s Report ........................................................................................................................ 103

         Independent Auditor’s Report ....................................................................................................... 104

         Statement of Operations ................................................................................................................... 107

         Statement of Financial Position ..................................................................................................... 108

         Statement of Change in Net Financial Assets ...........................................................................109

         Statement of Cash Flows ................................................................................................................... 110

         Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses .................................................................... 111

         Notes to Financial Statements ........................................................................................................112

         Schedule 1: Clients’ Guaranteed Accounts ................................................................................ 124




102                                                                    Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                         Financial Information




Management’s Report


Management’s Responsibility for Financial Reporting

The financial statements have been prepared by management in accordance with Canadian public
sector accounting standards for all areas except other trust assets under administration. The
integrity and objectivity of these statements are management's responsibility. Management is also
responsible for all of the notes to the financial statements and schedules, and for ensuring that this
information is consistent, where appropriate, with the information contained in the financial
statements.

Management is also responsible for implementing and maintaining a system of internal controls to
provide reasonable assurance that reliable financial information is produced.

The Public Trustee is responsible for ensuring that management fulfills its responsibilities for
financial reporting and internal control and exercises these responsibilities through the Office of
the Public Guardian and Trustee.

The Auditor General of Alberta has performed an independent external audit of these financial
statements, in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards, and has expressed
their opinion in the report that follows. The Auditor General has full and unrestricted access to the
financial management of the Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee and meets when required.

On behalf of the Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee,


[Original signed by]                                         [Original signed by]
Jakub Denkiewicz                                             Linda Camminatore
Acting Assistant Deputy Minister                             Public Trustee
Strategic Services Division                                  Office of the Public Guardian & Trustee
Seniors, Community and Social Services                       Seniors, Community and Social Services




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                          103
Financial Information




Independent Auditor’s Report


To the Minister of Assisted Living and Social Services

Report on the Financial Statements

Opinion
I have audited the financial statements of the Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee, Estates and
Trusts, which comprise the statement of financial position as at March 31, 2025, and the statements
of operations, remeasurement gains and losses, changes in net financial assets, and cash flows for
the year then ended, and notes to the financial statements, including a summary of significant
accounting policies.

In my opinion, the accompanying financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of the Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee, Estates and Trusts as at
March 31, 2025, and the results of its operations, its remeasurement gains and losses, its changes in
net financial assets, and its cash flows for the year then ended in accordance with the accounting
policies as described in Note 2 of the financial statements.

Basis for opinion
I conducted my audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards. My
responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor's Responsibilities for the
Audit of the Financial Statements section of my report. I am independent of the Office of the Public
Guardian and Trustee, Estates and Trusts in accordance with the ethical requirements that are
relevant to my audit of the financial statements in Canada, and I have fulfilled my other ethical
responsibilities in accordance with these requirements. I believe that the audit evidence I have
obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion.

Emphasis of matter - basis of accounting
I draw attention to Note 2 of the financial statements, which describes the basis of accounting. The
financial statements are prepared to account for assets held in trust under the Public Trustee Act
and Public Trustee Investment Regulation. As a result, the financial statements may not be suitable
for another purpose. My opinion is not modified in respect of this matter.

Other information
Management is responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the
information included in the Annual Report, but does not include the financial statements and my
auditor’s report thereon. The Annual Report is expected to be made available to me after the date of
this auditor’s report.

My opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and I do not express
any form of assurance conclusion thereon.

In connection with my audit of the financial statements, my responsibility is to read the other
information identified above and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially
inconsistent with the financial statements or my knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise
appears to be materially misstated.


104                                           Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Financial Information



If, based on the work I will perform on this other information, I conclude that there is a material
misstatement of this other information, I am required to communicate the matter to those charged
with governance.

Responsibilities of management and those charged with governance for the financial
statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements in
accordance with the accounting policies as described in Note 2 of the financial statements, and for
such internal control as management determines is necessary to enable the preparation of the
financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.

In preparing the financial statements, management is responsible for assessing the Office of the
Public Guardian and Trustee, Estates and Trusts’ ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing,
as applicable, matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting
unless an intention exists to liquidate or to cease operations, or there is no realistic alternative but
to do so.

Those charged with governance are responsible for overseeing the Office of the Public Guardian
and Trustee, Estates and Trusts’ financial reporting process.

Auditor's responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements
My objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a
whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor's
report that includes my opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a
guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing
standards will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from
fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably
be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial
statements.

As part of an audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards, I exercise
professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit. I also:

•   Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due
    to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain
    audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion. The risk of
    not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from
    error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the
    override of internal control.
•   Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit
    procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an
    opinion on the effectiveness of the Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee, Estates and Trusts’
    internal control.
•   Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting
    estimates and related disclosures made by management.
•   Conclude on the appropriateness of management’s use of the going concern basis of accounting
    and, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to
    events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Office of the Public Guardian and
    Trustee, Estates and Trusts’ ability to continue as a going concern. If I conclude that a material
    uncertainty exists, I am required to draw attention in my auditor’s report to the related
    disclosures in the financial statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify my


Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                        105
Financial Information



      opinion. My conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of my auditor’s
      report. However, future events or conditions may cause the Office of the Public Guardian and
      Trustee, Estates and Trusts to cease to continue as a going concern.
•     Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements, including
      the disclosures, and whether the financial statements represent the underlying transactions
      and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation.
I communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the planned
scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in
internal control that I identify during my audit.

[Original signed by W. Doug Wylie FCPA, FCMA, ICD.D]
Auditor General

June 5, 2025
Edmonton, Alberta




106                                            Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                   Financial Information




Statement of Operations
Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee Estates and Trusts
Year Ended March 31, 2025




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                    107
Financial Information




Statement of Financial Position
Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee Estates and Trusts
As at March 31, 2025




108                                        Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                   Financial Information




Statement of Change in Net Financial Assets




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                     109
Financial Information




Statement of Cash Flows
Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee Estates and Trusts
Year Ended March 31, 2025




110                                        Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                   Financial Information




Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses
Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee Estates and Trusts
Year Ended March 31, 2025




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                    111
Financial Information




Notes to Financial Statements
Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee Estates and Trusts
Year Ended March 31, 2025




112                                        Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                   Financial Information



Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee Estates and Trusts
Notes to Financial Statements (Cont’d)
Year Ended March 31, 2025




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                    113
Financial Information



Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee Estates and Trusts
Notes to Financial Statements (Cont’d)
Year Ended March 31, 2025




114                                        Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                   Financial Information



Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee Estates and Trusts
Notes to Financial Statements (Cont’d)
Year Ended March 31, 2025




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                    115
Financial Information



Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee Estates and Trusts
Notes to Financial Statements (Cont’d)
Year Ended March 31, 2025




116                                        Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                   Financial Information



Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee Estates and Trusts
Notes to Financial Statements (Cont’d)
Year Ended March 31, 2025




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                    117
Financial Information



Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee Estates and Trusts
Notes to Financial Statements (Cont’d)
Year Ended March 31, 2025




118                                        Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                   Financial Information



Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee Estates and Trusts
Notes to Financial Statements (Cont’d)
Year Ended March 31, 2025




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                    119
Financial Information



Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee Estates and Trusts
Notes to Financial Statements (Cont’d)
Year Ended March 31, 2025




120                                        Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                   Financial Information



Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee Estates and Trusts
Notes to Financial Statements (Cont’d)
Year Ended March 31, 2025




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                    121
Financial Information



Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee Estates and Trusts
Notes to Financial Statements (Cont’d)
Year Ended March 31, 2025




122                                        Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                   Financial Information



Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee Estates and Trusts
Notes to Financial Statements (Cont’d)
Year Ended March 31, 2025




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                    123
Financial Information




Schedule 1: Clients’ Guaranteed Accounts
Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee Estates and Trusts




124                                        Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                           Financial Information




Other Financial Information
Table of Contents
        Statement of Remissions, Compromises, and Write-offs (unaudited) ..........................126
        Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited) ................................................................................................ 127
        Trust Funds Under Administration (unaudited) ...................................................................130




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                             125
Financial Information



Statement of Remissions, Compromises, and Write-offs (unaudited)
Department of Seniors, Community and Social Services
Year Ended March 31, 2025
In thousands

The following Statement has been prepared pursuant to section 23 of the Financial Administration Act .

The Statement includes all Remissions, Compromises and Write-offs of the Department of Seniors,
Community and Social Services made or approved during the Fiscal Year.

                                                                                       2025              2024
                                                                                      Actual            Actual

      Remissions under section 21 of the Financial Administration Act :           $             -   $             -

      Compromises under section 22 of the Financial Administration Act :
       Income Support, Assured Income for Severely Handicapped, Alberta                         -                 -
       Adult Health Benefit
       Seniors Property Tax Deferral Program                                                    3                 -
       Other                                                                                    -                 -
                                                                                                3                 -

      Bankruptcies:
       Income Support, Assured Income for Severely Handicapped, Alberta                        48                58
       Adult Health Benefit
       Other                                                                                    -                 -
                                                                                               48                58

      Write-Offs:
       Income Support, Assured Income for Severely Handicapped, Alberta
       Adult Health Benefit                                                                4,733          11,184
       Alberta Seniors Benefit                                                               230              65
       Supplementary Accommodation Benefit                                                    40              11
       Disability Services                                                                     -              27
       Other                                                                                   -               -
                                                                                           5,003          11,287

      Total                                                                       $        5,054 $        11,345




126                                               Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                                                  Financial Information



Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited)
Department of Seniors, Community and Social Services
Year Ended March 31, 2025
In thousands
                                                                                                                                                                    Over
                                                                              Restated                                           Adjusted                        Expended
                                                                               Voted       Supplementary                          Voted             Voted         (Under
                                                                          Estimate (1)       Estimate      Adjustments (2)       Estimate         Actuals (3)    Expended)

EXPENSE VOTE BY PROGRAM
  1   Ministry Support Services
  1.1 Minister's Office                                                   $         963    $           -   $             -   $         963    $            847   $      (116)
  1.2 Deputy Minister's Office                                                      818                -                 -             818                 842            24
  1.3 Strategic Services                                                         19,531                -                 -          19,531              19,285          (246)
  1.4 Corporate Services                                                          8,458                -                 -           8,458               8,050          (408)
  1.5 Appeals Panels                                                              3,983                -                 -           3,983               3,492          (491)
                                                                                 33,753                -                 -          33,753              32,516        (1,237)

  2     Employment and Income Support
  2.1   Program Planning and Delivery                                           102,070                -                 -         102,070             132,442        30,372
  2.2   Income Support to People Expected to Work or Working                    367,917                -                 -         367,917             347,385       (20,532)
  2.3   Income Support to People with Barriers to Full Employment               227,035                -                 -         227,035             228,306         1,271
  2.4   Career and Employment Services                                           95,892                -                 -          95,892              81,053       (14,839)
                                                                                792,914                -                 -         792,914             789,186        (3,728)

  3     Assured Income for the Severely Handicapped
  3.1   Program Planning and Delivery                                             36,008               -                 -           36,008             40,570        4,562
  3.2   Financial Assistance Grants                                            1,610,622               -                 -        1,610,622          1,632,688       22,066
                                                                               1,646,630               -                 -        1,646,630          1,673,258       26,628

  4     Disability Services
  4.1   Program Planning and Delivery                                             59,931               -                 -           59,931             70,911       10,980
  4.2   Persons with Developmental Disabilities - Supports to Albertans        1,219,148               -                 -        1,219,148          1,217,059       (2,089)
  4.3   Persons with Developmental Disabilities - Direct Operations               41,559               -                 -           41,559             39,487       (2,072)
  4.4   Family Support for Children with Disabilities                            233,765               -                 -          233,765            259,461       25,696
  4.5   Provincial Disability Supports Initiatives                                18,199               -                 -           18,199             20,090        1,891
  4.6   Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Initiatives                               25,239               -                 -           25,239             27,617        2,378
  4.7   Disability Advocate's Office                                               1,220               -                 -            1,220              1,165          (55)
                                                                               1,599,061               -                 -        1,599,061          1,635,790       36,729

  5     Homeless and Outreach Support Services
  5.1   Program Planning and Delivery                                             3,353                -                 -           3,353               3,820          467
  5.2   Homeless Shelters                                                       108,051                -                 -         108,051             150,486       42,435
  5.3   Homeless Support Outreach Services                                      101,518                -                 -         101,518             101,718          200
                                                                                212,922                -                 -         212,922             256,024       43,102

  6     Community Supports and Family Safety
  6.1   Program Planning and Delivery                                             1,771                -                 -           1,771               1,700           (71)
  6.2   Family and Community Support Services                                   115,000                -                 -         115,000             107,276        (7,724)
  6.3   Family and Community Safety                                              19,400                -                 -          19,400              26,171         6,771
                                                                                136,171                -                 -         136,171             135,147        (1,024)

  7     Seniors Services
  7.1   Program Planning and Delivery                                             6,248                -                 -           6,248               5,099        (1,149)
  7.2   Special Needs Assistance Grants                                          14,547                -                 -          14,547              15,636         1,089
  7.3   Seniors Home Adaptation and Repair                                        1,565                -                 -           1,565                 709          (856)
  7.4   Seniors Community Grants                                                  6,191                -                 -           6,191               4,083        (2,108)
                                                                                 28,551                -                 -          28,551              25,527        (3,024)

  8     Alberta Seniors Benefit
  8.1   Program Planning and Delivery                                             6,216                -                 -           6,216               6,763           547
  8.2   Alberta Seniors Benefit Grants                                          389,718                -                 -         389,718             401,817        12,099
  8.3   Supplementary Accommodations Benefit                                    110,843                -                 -         110,843              85,263       (25,580)
                                                                                506,777                -                 -         506,777             493,843       (12,934)




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                        127
Financial Information



Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited)

Department of Seniors, Community and Social Services
Year Ended March 31, 2025
In thousands

   9      Housing
   9.1    Program Planning and Delivery                                        10,960             -            -         10,960          12,613           1,653
   9.2    Assistance to Alberta Social Housing Corporation                    157,449             -            -        157,449         157,449               -
                                                                              168,409             -            -        168,409         170,062           1,653

   10     Public Guardian and Trustee Services                                 27,889             -            -         27,889          27,711            (178)

   11     Continuing Care
   11.1   Program Planning and Delivery                                        12,953             -            -         12,953          10,339          (2,614)
   11.2   Continuing Care Programs                                            167,576             -            -        167,576         123,408         (44,168)
   11.3   Continuing Care Beds                                                241,563             -            -        241,563         208,050         (33,513)
                                                                              422,092             -            -        422,092         341,797         (80,295)

   12     Services Provided to Other Ministries                                 2,634             -            -          2,634           2,049            (585)

   13   Disaster Recovery & Emergency Assistance
   13.1 Disaster Recovery Supports                                                   -            -            -              -               -               -
   13.2 Disaster Recovery Grants to Alberta Social Housing Corporation               -            -            -              -           1,100           1,100
                                                                                     -            -            -              -           1,100           1,100
   14     Affordability Supports and Inflation Relief
   14     Affordability Supports and Inflation Relief                                -            -            -              -             271            271
                                                                                     -            -            -              -             271            271

Capital Payments to Related Parties
   9      Housing
   9.2 Assistance to Alberta Social Housing Corporation                       160,931             -       (2,400)       158,531          55,931        (102,600)

   13   Disaster Recovery & Emergency Assistance
   13.2 Disaster Recovery Grants to Alberta Social Housing Corporation               -            -            -              -            4,000          4,000
                                                                               160,931            -       (2,400)       158,531           59,931        (98,600)
          Total                                                              5,738,734            -       (2,400)     5,736,334        5,644,212        (92,122)
          Credit or Recovery Shortfall                                                                      (585)          (585)                            585
                                                                         $ 5,738,734     $        -   $   (2,985)   $ 5,735,749    $   5,644,212   $    (91,537)
          (Lapse)/Encumbrance                                                                                                                      $    (91,537)

CAPITAL INVESTMENT VOTE BY PROGRAM
  2     Employment and Income Support
  2.1 Program Planning and Delivery                                      $           -   $        -   $   1,400     $     1,400    $      1,377    $        (23)
                                                                                     -            -       1,400           1,400           1,377             (23)
   4      Disability Services
   4.1    Program Planning and Delivery                                             -             -       1,238           1,238           1,402             164
   4.3    Persons with Developmental Disabilities - Direct Operations             572             -         817           1,389             221          (1,168)
   4.7    Disability Advocate's Office                                              -             -         438             438              51            (387)
                                                                                  572             -       2,493           3,065           1,674          (1,391)

   10     Public Guardian and Trustee Services                                  3,500             -         800           4,300           3,430            (870)
                                                                                3,500             -         800           4,300           3,430            (870)
          Total                                                          $      4,072    $    -       $   4,693     $     8,765    $      6,481    $     (2,284)
          (Lapse)/Encumbrance                                                                                                                      $     (2,284)


FINANCIAL TRANSACTIONS VOTE BY PROGRAM
   7    Seniors Services
   7.3 Seniors Home Adaptation and Repair                                $      9,950    $        -   $        -    $     9,950    $      5,443    $     (4,507)
   7.5 Property Tax Deferral Loans                                              9,750             -            -          9,750           8,671          (1,079)
        Total                                                            $     19,700    $        -            -    $    19,700    $     14,114    $     (5,586)
        (Lapse)/Encumbrance                                                                                                                        $     (5,586)




128                                                                          Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                                                          Financial Information



Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited)

Department of Seniors, Community and Social Services
Year Ended March 31, 2025
In thousands

CONTINGENCY VOTE BY PROGRAM
  OPERATING EXPENSE
  2    Employment and Income Support
  2.1 Program Planning and Delivery                                            $            -   $                -   $         3,300    $       3,300    $         3,300    $            -
  2.2 Income Support to People Expected to Work or Working                                  -                    -           180,400          180,400            180,400
  2.3 Income Support to People with Barriers to Full Employment                             -                    -            11,700           11,700             11,700
                                                                                            -                    -           195,400          195,400            195,400                 -
   13   Disaster Recovery & Emergency Assistance
   13.1 Disaster Recovery Supports                                                          -                    -            13,900           13,900             13,001             (899)
                                                                                            -                    -            13,900           13,900             13,001             (899)
         Total                                                                 $            -   $                -   $       209,300    $     209,300    $       208,401    $        (899)
         (Lapse)/Encumbrance                                                                                                                                                $        (899)

Notes:
 (1) As per "Expense Vote by Program,” “Capital Investment Vote by Program” and “Financial Transactions Vote by Program” pages 191-193 of the 2024-25 Government Estimates. The

     Restated Voted Estimate column reflects the adjustments to supply vote amounts provided to the department by the Designation and Transfer of Responsibility Regulations under
     Order in Council 384/2024 passed on December 12, 2024.

(2) Adjustments include encumbrances, capital carry over amounts, transfers between votes, credit or recovery increases approved by Treasury Board, and credit or recovery shortfalls.

   An encumbrance is incurred when, on a vote-by-vote basis, the total of actual disbursements in the prior year exceed the total adjusted estimate. All calculated encumbrances from
   the prior year are reflected as an adjustment to reduce the corresponding voted estimate in the current year.

   Adjustments also include supply vote transfers for "Contingency" as approved by the Lieutenant Governor in Council under the direction of the Minister of Finance. The Contingency
   supply vote consists of a provisional funding authority transferable to any ministry. Upon approval by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, the President of Treasury Board and Minister
   of Finance may either spend or transfer all or a portion of this supply vote to another minister for public emergencies, disasters or unanticipated costs. On March 26, 2025, the
   department received a transfer from Contingency under Order in Council 058/2025 for $209,300,000.

(3) Actuals exclude non-voted amounts as no cash disbursement is required (non-cash amounts), or because the Legislative Assembly has already provided the funding authority

   pursuant to a statute other than an appropriation act. Non-cash amounts (such as amortization, accretion, valuation adjustments, and other provisions) are excluded as these
   amounts do not require any expenditure or payment of public money. Year-end expense accruals & payables which will immediately require a cash outlay (payment of public money)
   to settle or otherwise extinguish the liabilities are included in Actuals.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                                     129
Financial Information



Trust Funds Under Administration (unaudited)
In thousands
The ministry administers trust funds that are regulated and other funds consisting of public money
over which the legislature has no power of appropriation. As the ministry has no equity in the funds
and administers them for the purpose of various trusts, they are not included in the ministry’s
financial statements.

At March 31, 2025, the trust funds under administration were as follows:


                                                                             2025              2024
                                                                            Actual            Actual




Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee Estates and Trusts            $     685,942 $          667,217
Persons with Developmental Disabilities Clients Trust Funds                       127                136
                                                                        $     686,069 $          667,353




130                                         Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                   Annual Report Extracts and Other Statutory Reports




Annual Report Extracts and Other Statutory Reports

Public Interest Disclosure (Whistleblower Protection) Act
Section 32 of the Public Interest Disclosure (Whistleblower Protection) Act reads:

32(1) Every chief officer must prepare a report annually on all disclosures that have been made to
      the designated officer of the department, public entity or office of the Legislature for which
      the chief officer is responsible.

  (2) The report under subsection (1) must include the following information:

        (a)   the number of disclosures received by the designated officer, the number of
              disclosures acted on and the number of disclosures not acted on by the designated
              officer;

        (b)   the number of investigations commenced by the designated officer as a result of
              disclosures;

        (c)   in the case of an investigation that results in a finding of wrongdoing, a description of
              the wrongdoing and any recommendations made or corrective measures taken in
              relation to the wrongdoing or the reasons why no corrective measure was taken.

  (3) The report under subsection (1) must be included in the annual report of the department,
      public entity or office of the Legislature if the annual report is made publicly available.

There were no disclosures of wrongdoing filed with my office, for your department, between
April 1, 2024 and March 31, 2025.




Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                 131
