 
 Results Analysis 
 
 
 Seniors, Community and Social Services | Annual Report 2024–2025 65 
 
Performance Measure 1.c: 
New affordable housing units and rental subsidies available for Albertans with low 
income 
Data for this measure is collected by the Housing Operations and Housing Capital Program 
branches in the Housing Division. The result for this measure is calculated in three steps:  
1. Calculate the total number of new affordable housing units by adding the total number of newly 
built units and the total number of regenerated units completed in a fiscal year.  
 
o Affordable housing is defined as rental housing for persons in “core housing need” 
provided on a rent-geared-to-income basis (i.e., the amount of rent to be paid by tenants 
is based on the amount of income earned, often as a percentage of the tenant’s income). 
A household is considered in “core housing need” if it falls below at least one of the 
adequacy, affordability, or suitability standards, and spends 30 per cent or more of its 
total before-tax income on housing. 
o A newly built unit is defined as one new unit of housing that has been built within a 
larger structure such as a house, apartment, mobile home, or group of rooms where a 
person or family eat, live, and sleep. 
o A regenerated unit is defined as an existing unit of housing that has undergone a 
significant refurbishment to improve the interior and/or exterior and upgrade the unit. 
Upgrading can apply to finishes, materials and/or have the housing comply with 
building codes or meet/exceed current standard minimums. The existing unit has been 
built within a larger structure such as a house, apartment, mobile home, or group of 
rooms where a person or family eat, live, and sleep. 
o The number of new and regenerated affordable housing units are based on completed 
capital projects. Units are recognized as completed when the occupancy permit has 
been issued. Capital project information is tracked and retained in the internal HOME 
system.  
2. Calculate the total number of rental subsidies by subtracting the total number of households 
supported through the rent supplement program at the start of the fiscal year (April 1) from 
the total number of households supported through the rent supplement program at the end 
of the fiscal year (March 31).  
 
o The number of households assisted through rent subsidies is based on incremental 
change in households supported through the Rental Assistance Benefit, Temporary 
Rental Assistance Benefit and the Private to Landlord Rent Supplement programs. 
o Information on rental subsidies is provided by housing management bodies. This 
information is added to the internal HOME system following a validation process.  
3. Calculate the entire inventory of affordable housing added in a fiscal year by adding the sub-
total from step one (total number of new affordable housing units) and the sub-total from step 
two (total number of rental subsidies). 
 
Source: Seniors, Community and Social Services; HOME system  
  