Classification: Protected B
Mental Health and Addiction, Government of Alberta | Mental Health and Addiction 2024 –2025
Annual Report

©2025 Government of Alberta | Published: June 2025
ISBN 978-1-4601-6291-0
ISSN 2817-3058

This publication is issued under the Open Government Licence – Alberta
(http://open.alberta.ca/licence).

Note to Readers: Copies of the annual report are available on the Alberta Open Government
Portal website at https://open.alberta.ca/publications/2817-3058


ii                                                   Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
Table of Contents

Preface ........................................................................................................................................................ 3

Minister’s Accountability Statement .............................................................................................. 4

Message from the Minister ................................................................................................................. 5

Management’s Responsibility for Reporting .............................................................................. 7

Results Analysis ..................................................................................................................................... 9
      Ministry Overview ......................................................................................................................................... 10
      Discussion and Analysis of Results .................................................................................................... 16
      Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology ..................................................................... 64

Financial Information ......................................................................................................................... 67
      Reporting Entity and Method Consolidation ................................................................................... 68
      Ministry Financial Highlights ................................................................................................................... 69
      Financial Statements of Other Reporting Entities ........................................................................ 76
      Financial Information ................................................................................................................................128

Annual Report Extracts and Other Statutory Reports....................................................... 131




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                                  1
Introduction




2              Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                            Introduction




Preface

The Public Accounts of Alberta are prepared in accordance with the Financial Administration Act
and the Sustainable Fiscal Planning and Reporting Act. The Public Accounts consist of the annual
report of the Government of Alberta and the annual reports of each ministry.

The 2024-25 Annual Report reflects the 2024-27 Ministry Business Plans, the Government of
Alberta Strategic Plan, as well as the ministry’s activities and accomplishments during the 2024-25
fiscal year, which ended on March 31, 2025.

The Annual Report of the Government of Alberta contains Budget 2024 Key Results, the audited
Consolidated Financial Statements and Performance Results, which compares actual performance
results to desired results set out in the government’s strategic plan.

This annual report of the Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction contains the Minister’s
Accountability Statement, the ministry’s Financial Information and Results Analysis, a comparison
of actual performance results to desired results set out in the Ministry Business Plan. This ministry
annual report also includes:

• other financial information as required by the Financial Administration Act and Sustainable Fiscal
   Planning and Reporting Act, as separate reports, to the extent that the ministry has anything to
   report.

All Ministry Annual Reports should be considered along with the Government of Alberta Annual
Report to provide a complete overview of government’s commitment to openness, accountability,
and fiscal transparency.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                   3
Introduction




Minister’s Accountability Statement

The ministry’s annual report for the year ended March 31, 2025, was prepared under my direction
in accordance with the Sustainable Fiscal Planning and Reporting Act and the government’s
accounting policies. All the government’s policy decisions as at June 5, 2025, with material
economic or fiscal implications of which I am aware have been considered in the preparation of this
report.


[Original signed by]

Honourable Rick Wilson
Minister of Mental Health and Addiction




4                                                     Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                 Introduction




Message from the Minister

                                             Over the past year, Alberta’s government has made significant
                                             progress building a comprehensive, recovery-oriented system
                                             of care—the Alberta Recovery Model. This model is a first-of-
                                             its kind approach to support people in maintaining their
                                             wellness and ensure those facing mental health challenges or
                                             addiction have access to evidence-based services and
                                             supports to pursue recovery.

                                             Since 2019, Alberta’s government has increased mental
                                             health supports, added more than 10,000 publicly funded
                                             addiction treatment spaces, eliminated user fees for live-in
                                             addiction treatment, and expanded access to the award-
                                             winning Virtual Opioid Dependency Program, which offers
                                             same-day addiction medicine treatment.

                                         The next monumental step was to prioritize mental health
                                         and addiction care in Alberta through the establishment of
                                         Recovery Alberta and the Canadian Centre of Recovery
Excellence (CoRE). Since September 2024, publicly funded mental health, addiction, and
correctional health services are delivered by a dedicated provincial health agency—Recovery
Alberta. More than 10,000 staff and approximately 800 physicians transferred from Alberta Health
Services to Alberta’s first provincial health agency focused solely on mental health and addiction.
This structural reform—a core part of refocusing Alberta’s health system—was completed without
disruptions to patient care, and represents a crucial step forward in delivering more coordinated,
focused, and recovery-oriented services across the province. Building on this critical work is CoRE’s
mission to empower decision-makers with data and evidence to support those with mental illness
or addiction in their pursuit of recovery. CoRE is the first organization of its kind in Canada to focus
on system-level evaluation and research, comprehensive data analytics and leadership
collaboration to enable strong recovery outcomes for people across Alberta.

A significant component of the Alberta Recovery Model is expanding long-term addiction treatment
capacity by building 11 world-class recovery communities across the province. Once completed,
these facilities will provide no-cost, long-term, holistic addiction treatment to more than
2,000 people living in Alberta annually. In July 2024, the Lakeview Recovery Community opened in
Gunn, joining facilities already operating in Red Deer and Lethbridge. These communities
supported more than 400 people in their pursuit of recovery over the past year.

Police and Justice partners continue to have an important role in responding to addiction
challenges. Alberta’s government works with police services in Edmonton and Calgary to connect
those in need with critical supports through Human-centred Engagement and Liaison Partnership
teams and Police and Crisis Teams. Therapeutic living units, correctional health, and transitional
services are also offered in provincial correctional and remand centres, ensuring incarcerated
individuals are supported in addressing their health needs and rebuilding aspects of their life
eroded by addiction.

A key part of strengthening recovery-oriented care across the province is the continued focus on
partnering with Indigenous communities to remove barriers to comprehensive, culturally
appropriate services. Five Indigenous recovery communities are underway in partnership with
Siksika Nation, Tsuut’ina First Nation, Enoch Cree Nation, Métis Nation of Alberta, and Blood Tribe.



Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                       5
Introduction



The mental health and well-being of Albertans, regardless of where they live, is also a top priority.
Through the department’s continued partnership with Counselling Alberta, people can access
low-cost, no-waitlist counselling services online or in-person. Those struggling can also connect
with local mental health and addiction supports through 211 Alberta.

Supporting younger people is another vital part of the Alberta Recovery Model, ensuring children
and youth receive the mental health care they need to live healthy, full lives. In partnership with
CASA Mental Health, the department invested in critical mental health supports for children and
youth, including funding for new inpatient CASA House sites, expanding youth day treatment
programs, and adding 20 new mental health classrooms in 13 communities.

Data from Recovery Alberta and the Alberta Substance Use Surveillance System is highlighting early
signs of success in our government’s commitment to the Alberta Recovery Model:

• In 2024 compared to 2023, Alberta recorded a 37 per cent reduction in opioid-related deaths
    and EMS responses for opioid related events decreased by 37 per cent.
• Also in 2024, emergency department visits related to opioids decreased by 26 per cent and
    hospitalizations related to opioids decreased by 16 per cent compared to the previous year.
• Prescribed opioid overdoses are near zero, and deaths from methamphetamine, alcohol, and
    cocaine are down significantly from previous years.
• Recovery Alberta’s opioid dependency program supported a record number of about 12,300
    unique clients in 2024, with more than 10,000 treated. This includes about 8,300 unique clients
    supported by the Virtual Opioid Dependency Program, with 6,400 receiving treatment.
• More than 10,000 unique clients were served in addiction treatment beds in 2024-25.
• From April 1, 2024, to December 31, 2024, more than 12,000 unique clients were treated for an
    addiction or mental health concern in acute care settings.
• More than 151,000 unique clients received mental health and addiction treatment through
    nearly 1.9 million visits in community outpatient settings in 2024-25.

While these data indicators are encouraging, efforts to strengthen Alberta’s recovery-oriented
system of care continue. Over the past year, the groundwork was laid for delivering on promised
compassionate intervention legislation to support the health, wellness, and recovery of people
facing severe addiction challenges and in turn, restore safety for families and communities.
Planning ahead, Alberta’s government has committed to building two new 150-bed compassionate
intervention centres in Edmonton and Calgary, with initial spaces for launch in 2026.

The results achieved by the department over the past year are significant steps forward in ensuring
those with mental health or addiction challenges have access to evidence-based supports and
services to pursue recovery and live a purpose-filled life. With Recovery Alberta and CoRE now
operational, legislation in place, and significant capital investments underway, our province is
leading Canada in building a system rooted in recovery, compassion, evidence, and results.

I look forward to working with the department and all our partners in building on our many
successes and continuing to move the Alberta Recovery Model forward.


[Original signed by]

Honourable Rick Wilson
Minister of Mental Health and Addiction


6                                                         Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                             Introduction




Management’s Responsibility for Reporting

The Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction includes the Department of Mental Health and
Addiction, Recovery Alberta: Mental Health and Addiction Services, and the Canadian Centre of
Recovery Excellence. The executives of the individual entities within the ministry have the primary
responsibility and accountability for the respective entities. Collectively, the executives ensure the
ministry complies with all relevant legislation, regulations and policies.

Ministry business plans, annual reports, performance results and the supporting management
information are integral to the government’s fiscal and strategic plan, annual report, quarterly
reports, and other financial and performance reporting.

Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the accompanying ministry financial information
and performance results for the ministry rests with the Minister of Mental Health and Addiction.
Under the direction of the Minister, I oversee the preparation of the ministry’s annual report, which
includes the financial information, performance results on all objectives and initiatives identified in
the Ministry Business Plan, and performance results for all ministry-supported commitments that
were included in the 2024-27 Government of Alberta Strategic Plan. The financial information and
performance results, out of necessity, include amounts that are based on estimates and judgments.
The financial information is prepared using the government’s stated accounting policies, which are
based on Canadian public sector accounting standards. The performance measures are prepared in
accordance with the following criteria:

• Reliable – information used in applying performance measure methodologies agrees with the
   underlying source data for the current and prior years’ results.
• Understandable – the performance measure methodologies and results are presented clearly.
• Comparable – the methodologies for performance measure preparation are applied consistently
   for the current and prior years’ results.
• Complete – outcomes, performance measures and related targets match those included in the
   ministry’s Budget 2024.

As Deputy Minister, in addition to program responsibilities, I am responsible for the ministry’s
financial administration and reporting functions. The ministry maintains systems of financial
management and internal control which give consideration to costs, benefits and risks that are
designed to:

• provide reasonable assurance that transactions are properly authorized, executed in accordance
   with prescribed legislation and regulations, and properly recorded so as to maintain
   accountability of public money;
• provide information to manage and report on performance;
• safeguard the assets and properties of the province under ministry administration;
• provide Executive Council, the President of Treasury Board and Minister of Finance and the
   Minister of Mental Health and Addiction the information needed to fulfill their responsibilities;
   and
• facilitate preparation of Ministry business plans and annual reports required under the
   Sustainable Fiscal Planning and Reporting Act.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                    7
Introduction



In fulfilling my responsibilities for the ministry, I have relied, as necessary, on the executives of the
individual entities within the ministry.


[Original signed by]

Evan Romanow
Deputy Minister of Mental Health and Addiction
June 5, 2025




8                                                         Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                                                         Results Analysis




Results Analysis

Table of Contents
    Ministry Overview ......................................................................................................................................... 10
          Organizational Structure .................................................................................................................... 10
          Operational Overview .......................................................................................................................... 12
          Key Highlights ......................................................................................................................................... 14
    Discussion and Analysis of Results......................................................................................................... 16
          Actions that support the priorities of the Government of Alberta Strategic Plan....... 16
          Outcome One: Alberta has a comprehensive, integrated, and responsive
          recovery-oriented addiction and mental health system ....................................................... 18
          Outcome Two: Alberta’s communities and families have the capacity to support
          individuals pursuing recovery ......................................................................................................... 36
          Outcome Three: Albertans have access to high-quality, person-centred mental
          health and addiction programs and services ............................................................................. 45
    Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology......................................................................... 64




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                                   9
Results Analysis




Ministry Overview
The Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction leads implementation of the Alberta Recovery Model
and coordinates all Government of Alberta funding dedicated to planning and delivering mental
health and addiction services across the province spanning prevention, intervention, treatment,
and recovery.

The ministry is working to establish a comprehensive recovery-oriented system of care,
prioritizing initiatives that build mental health and addiction system capacity to increase the
recovery capital1 for Albertans pursuing recovery. In collaboration with health, justice, education,
and social sector partner ministries, Mental Health and Addiction provides support to develop
integrated, coordinated networks of community-based services and supports that are
person-centred and build on the strengths and resilience of individuals, families, and communities.
Alberta’s recovery-oriented system of care is focused on keeping communities safe while treating
mental health and addiction as health and social issues, rather than criminal issues.

The Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction relies on collaboration with external organizations
responsible for service delivery, Indigenous partners and communities, academic and research
institutions, a range of health professionals, and other government jurisdictions to deliver
high-quality mental health and addiction services and implement the Alberta Recovery Model.

Organizational Structure
As of March 31, 2025, the ministry consists of the Department of Mental Health and Addiction,
Recovery Alberta: Mental Health and Addiction Services (Recovery Alberta), the Canadian Centre of
Recovery Excellence (CoRE), and the Mental Health Review Panels.




The department sets strategic direction for the mental health and addiction system in alignment
with ministerial priorities and community needs. Responsibilities include policy, legislation,


1 Recovery capital is the combination of personal, interpersonal and community resources that an individual can draw

upon to begin and sustain recovery. These addiction and mental health interventions and recovery-oriented supports fall
under eight recovery domains: physical and mental health; safe housing and healthy environments; employment and
resolution of legal issues; vocational skills and education development; safe and meaningful family, social and leisure
activities; peer-based supports, community engagement and cultural supports; and (re)discovering meaning and purpose
of life.




10                                                               Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



funding allocation and management, and regulatory development; system planning, oversight,
governance, and accountability; licensing and monitoring service providers for regulatory
compliance; capital planning; and leading the provincial hazards psychosocial response.
The department coordinates with Recovery Alberta and CoRE on partnerships to address the
mental health and addiction needs of Albertans; procurement, contract, and funding management;
and data governance, collection, management, analytics, and public reporting.

Recovery Alberta (https://www.recoveryalberta.ca/) began operating on September 1, 2024 as the
provincial health agency providing comprehensive and accessible recovery-oriented mental health,
addiction, and correctional health services to Albertans to help them improve their overall health
and sustain recovery. Recovery Alberta’s responsibilities include delivery, oversight, coordination,
and provision of clinical services, such as emergency and crisis response, community treatment and
support services, acute and specialized services, prevention and mental health promotion,
education, and early intervention, as well as all health services in provincial correctional settings.

Recovery Alberta is focused on:

• Ensuring every Albertan struggling with addiction and/or mental health challenges is supported
   in their pursuit of recovery.
• Providing Albertans with access to a full continuum of recovery-oriented supports that help
   them improve overall health and sustain recovery.
• Improving mental health and addiction care for Albertans by further expanding access to
   treatment and recovery supports across Alberta.

CoRE (https://recoveryexcellence.org/) is a statutory corporation that empowers decision makers
with data and information to support people with mental illness or addiction in their pursuit of
recovery. CoRE’s responsibilities include conducting system-level evaluation and research;
monitoring system performance and analyzing data to develop evidence-based recommendations
and inform policies and practices; providing advice and guidance on the effectiveness of the Alberta
Recovery Model; and collaborating with stakeholders to ensure innovative and effective strategies
related to mental health and addiction issues.

Mental Health Review Panels (https://www.alberta.ca/mental-health-review-panel-roster) are
adjudicative bodies that hear applications under the Mental Health Act (https://open.alberta.ca/
publications/m13). Panels play an important role in protecting the rights of patients detained in
facilities and individuals subject to community treatment orders under the act. The Minister of
Mental Health and Addiction appoints a roster of members who are called to serve on review
panels.

The Mental Health Patient Advocate (MHPA) (https://www.alberta.ca/alberta-mental-health-
advocate) is an independent body that is not part of a provincial health agency, hospital, clinic or
treatment team. The MHPA reports annually to the Legislature through the Minister of Mental Health
and Addiction and is responsible for providing support to people who have been involuntarily
detained in designated mental health facilities or who are the subject of community treatment orders
under the Mental Health Act. The MHPA helps Albertans understand their rights under the Mental
Health Act, navigate the mental health system, and investigates complaints.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                11
Results Analysis



Operational Overview
With direction from the Minister of Mental Health and Addiction, the Deputy Minister is responsible
for the daily operations of the Department of Mental Health and Addiction, structured as follows:

Deputy Minister’s Office
The Deputy Minister’s Office (DMO) supports the Minister in achieving the strategic goals of
Alberta’s government, the ministry, and public service. The DMO provides leadership within the
mental health and addiction system to drive innovation and deliver quality programs and services
to Albertans. The DMO plays a critical role in building and maintaining collaborative and effective
relationships with Recovery Alberta and CoRE, across government ministries, and within Alberta’s
mental health and addiction system to ensure the effective operations of the mental health and
addiction system. The DMO provides leadership to the department in issues management and
policy coordination, as well as guidance in priority setting, decision-making, and coordinating all
correspondence for the Minister and Deputy Minister.

Policy and Programs Division
The Policy and Programs Division develops and implements government mental health and
addiction legislation and policy as well as administers and oversees mental health and addiction
program funding to support the Alberta Recovery Model. The division is comprised of two
branches—Legislation and Community Partnerships and Community Response and Programs—
and a grant administration support team, all of which work with other government ministries,
Recovery Alberta, CoRE, and other community partners to achieve the ministry’s mandate.
Key initiatives led and supported by the division include developing and overseeing legislation and
legislative tools; child and youth mental health and addiction; Indigenous community partnerships;
supporting community-led responses to mental health and addiction issues across the continuum
of care; and expanding access to mental health and addiction supports throughout the province.

System Overview and Strategic Services Division
The System Overview and Strategic Services Division provides leadership that defines and supports
the department’s strategic direction as well as oversight to ensure safe and high-quality mental
health and addiction services. The division is comprised of two branches—Strategic and Corporate
Services and Regulatory Compliance and Data Stewardship—that coordinate strategic initiatives
and provide advice, evidence-based data and information, and regulatory oversight to advance
Alberta’s recovery-oriented system of care. Programs and initiatives led by the division include
mental health and addiction system transformation; strategic policy development; legislative and
intergovernmental relations coordination; agency governance oversight and support; business
continuity and emergency response planning; occupational health and safety; privacy legislation
compliance; oversight of data analytics, performance measurement, and business intelligence; and
licensing, regulatory enforcement, and monitoring for service provider compliance to the
Mental Health Services Protection Act (MHSPA) (https://open.alberta.ca/publications/m13p2).

Financial Services Division
The Financial Services Division provides strategic financial advice related to legislation,
regulations, programs, and policies. The division is comprised of two branches—Capital Projects
and Planning and Financial Services and Planning —and a Corporate Planning and Reporting unit.
The division develops and manages the ministry’s budget and forecasts; monitors financial
activities of the department; oversees financial reporting, corporate planning and reporting, and
ensures Recovery Alberta and CoRE fiscal accountability; coordinates the department’s grant
approval process; and leads capital projects and planning for mental health and addiction facilities,
in collaboration with the Ministry of Infrastructure as well as with Indigenous communities.



12                                                     Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                     Results Analysis



Communications (Communications and Public Engagement [CPE] – Mental Health and Addiction)
CPE provides Albertans and system partners with information about ministry policies, programs,
and initiatives. The team offers communications support, such as media relations, issues
management, writing and editing services, product development, and online communications
services. The team also works closely with Recovery Alberta, CoRE, and other reporting entities to
coordinate ministry communications.

Human Resources
Human Resources services are provided by the Public Service Commission. The team dedicated to
Mental Health and Addiction provides strategic advice, support, and expertise in employee and
labour relations, occupational health and safety, workforce development, and engagement. Human
Resources works in partnership with managers and employees to build and sustain workforce
capacity and create an environment where employees are respected, valued, and heard.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                             13
Results Analysis



Key Highlights
The Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction focused on accomplishing three outcomes identified in
the 2024-27 Ministry Business Plan:

• Alberta has a comprehensive, integrated, and responsive recovery-oriented addiction and
     mental health system.
• Alberta’s communities and families have the capacity to support individuals pursuing recovery.
• Albertans have access to high-quality, person-centred mental health and addiction programs
     and services.

Key highlights and results achieved by the Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction in 2024-25
include:

• Established Recovery Alberta as part of refocusing health care system: Transitioned more
     than 10,000 Alberta Health Services staff and about 800 physicians to Recovery Alberta, the new
     provincial health agency for mental health and addiction. Invested $1.5 billion2 to deliver mental
     health and addiction services province-wide (details on pages 18-20).
• Launched Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence (CoRE): Established CoRE as a statutory
     corporation to lead system-level evaluation and research to support decision makers, shape best
     practices, and inform data-driven policies that support advancement of the Alberta Recovery
     Model (details on pages 20-21).
• Advanced Compassionate Intervention: Introduced the proposed Compassionate Intervention
     Act to address the needs of those whose substance use or addiction causes harm to themselves
     or others. Announced plans to develop two 150-bed compassionate intervention centres in
     Edmonton and Calgary to support implementation of the act (details on pages 27 and 38).
• Continued to build and operate recovery communities: Invested more than $106 million
     (about $85.4 million in capital and more than $21 million in operating) to build and operate
     11 recovery communities, including five in direct partnership with Indigenous communities.
     Opened the Lakeview Recovery Community in Gunn. Served more than 410 individuals at the
     operational recovery communities in Red Deer, Lethbridge, and Gunn (details on pages 36-38).
• Expanded children and youth mental health supports: Investing $66 million (2023-26) to
     establish up to 60 mental health classrooms. Opened 12 new classrooms bringing the total to
     20 operational classrooms in 13 communities. Provided $29 million ($18 million in capital and
     $11 million operating) to expand the CASA House program to Fort McMurray, Calgary, and
     Medicine Hat over the next three years (details on pages 41 and 54).
• Strengthened prevention and intervention services: Provided more than $2.9 million to
     enhance 211 Alberta’s navigation services for rural and underserved communities. The service
     logged about 117,000 interactions by phone, text, and chat, up 33 per cent from previous year.
     Invested more than $6.5 million to deliver accessible, affordable, and no-wait-list counselling
     services through Counselling Alberta. (details on pages 48-49).
• Enhanced culturally relevant supports for Indigenous communities: Continued to plan and
     build five Indigenous-led recovery communities. Broke ground at the Siksika Nation Recovery
     Community and announced the Healing Waters Recovery Community in partnership with the


2 Financial figures attributed to Recovery Alberta in the Results Analysis section of this report are based on restated

numbers (April 1, 2024-March 31, 2025). This differs from the audited financial statements in the Financial
Information section of this report which are based on the nine months Recovery Alberta has been a legal provincial
health agency (July 1, 2024-March 31, 2025).


14                                                                  Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Results Analysis



   Métis Nation of Alberta. Provided $4.6 million to support culturally appropriate addiction and
   mental health initiatives (details on pages 42-44).
• Partnered with police services: Supported Police and Crisis Teams (PACT/RPACT) and
   Human-centred Engagement and Liaison Partnership (HELP) teams. PACT in Calgary and
   Edmonton facilitated over 4,760 crisis interactions and rural-based RPACT logged more than
   1,000 interactions. HELP teams in Calgary and Edmonton provided more than 5,300 community
   referrals (details on pages 30-31).
• Improved treatment referral pathways in the justice system: Enabled immediate access to
   opioid treatment for individuals detained by police via Virtual Opioid Dependency Program
   (VODP). Police services referred more than 2,000 detainees to VODP and there were more than
   1,700 opioid agonist treatment starts for individuals in custody (details on page 28).

The Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction remains committed to regulatory approaches and
program delivery that reduces unnecessary government oversight and emphasizes outcomes, to
improve access to government services, attract investment, support innovation and
competitiveness and grow Alberta businesses.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                               15
Results Analysis




Discussion and Analysis of Results
Actions that support the priorities of the Government of Alberta Strategic Plan


 Key Priority Two:
 Investing in Albertans

 Objective One: Ensuring an accessible, responsive, and refocused health care system
 • Refocusing the health care system to improve access and patient outcomes for Albertans and
     make health care better for all Alberta frontline health care workers. This refocusing will
     create a unified health system with provincial sector-based health authorities that centre
     around four dedicated organizations: primary care, acute care, continuing care, and mental
     health and addiction. Alberta Health Services will continue to deliver acute care services, and
     an Integration Council will ensure the system is in alignment to better deliver health
     outcomes.
     Detailed reporting found on pages 18-21 (Key Objective 1.1).
 Objective Two: Accelerating mental health and addiction support
 • Establishing a new centre of recovery excellence to guide mental health and addiction service
     delivery in Alberta. The new centre will apply an evidence-based approach to help
     government improve public policy in alignment with the Alberta Recovery Model and support
     better outcomes for those experiencing addiction and mental health issues.
     Detailed reporting found on pages 20-21 (Key Objective 1.1).

 • Working with municipalities and community-based organizations to improve access to
     recovery-oriented systems of care. This approach is based on a comprehensive continuum of
     person-centred care including prevention, intervention, treatment, and recovery supports
     giving hope to Albertans experiencing or at risk of mental health and addiction challenges.
     Detailed reporting found on pages 38-39 (Key Objective 2.1), 48 (Key Objective 3.2), and
     60-61 (Key Objective 3.5).

 • Implementing therapeutic living units and supports in correctional facilities in alignment
     with, and commitment to, a recovery-oriented system of care. The therapeutic living units
     offer structured, long-term and evidence-based interventions for those in custody, in order to
     address their substance use and break the cycle of recidivism.
     Detailed reporting found on page 28 (Key Objective 1.4).

 • Collaborating with government partners, First Nations, and Métis communities to expand
     treatment options available to Albertans experiencing addiction and improve their overall
     well-being. In 2024-25, more than $167 million is allocated to build and operate recovery
     communities throughout Alberta, including in Indigenous communities, to provide long term
     residential addiction treatment.
     Detailed reporting found on pages 36-38 (Key Objective 2.1) and 42 (Key Objective 2.3).




16                                                      Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis




 Key Priority Two:
 Investing in Albertans

 Objective Two: Accelerating mental health and addiction support (continued)

 • Expanding efforts to ensure culturally appropriate addiction and mental health community
     supports are in place for First Nations, Inuit and Métis peoples in Alberta. In 2024-25,
     approximately $7 million is allocated to strengthen community-based mental health and
     addiction programs and services for Indigenous people in Alberta.
     Detailed reporting found on pages 42-44 (Key Objective 2.3).

 • Enhancing treatment referral pathways in the criminal justice system and ensuring police
     services can access tools that support Albertans’ wellness and recovery while keeping
     communities safe. In 2024-25, over $23 million is allocated to provide tools to help police
     services throughout Alberta respond safely and effectively to mental health and addictions
     emergencies.
     Detailed reporting found on pages 28-31 (Key Objective 1.4).

 • Expanding access to mental health supports for children and youth in schools, including
     establishing mental health classroom teams in partnership with CASA Mental Health, giving
     children and youth the opportunity to seek out mental health supports sooner. In 2024-25,
     $36 million is allocated to build and $11 million is allocated to operationalize youth mental
     wellness centres (CASA Houses) throughout Alberta to provide live-in and day programs for
     youth facing severe mental health challenges.
     Detailed reporting found on pages 41 (Key Objective 2.2) and 54 (Key Objective 3.3).

 • Removing barriers and improving access to mental health supports by investing in
     Counselling Alberta to provide same day, no wait list, and affordable counselling sessions for
     all Albertans. Individuals who receive early intervention for mental health and addiction
     concerns tend to have better treatment outcomes.
     Detailed reporting found on page 49 (Key Objective 3.2).




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                 17
Results Analysis



Outcome One: Alberta has a comprehensive, integrated, and responsive recovery-
oriented addiction and mental health system
Mental Health and Addiction is implementing the Alberta Recovery Model—a comprehensive
recovery-oriented system of care to support Albertans to pursue recovery. The department is
responsible for oversight of the mental health and addiction system, including coordinating
government funding dedicated to delivering mental health and addiction services across the
province. The ministry is committed to creating positive outcomes for people experiencing mental
health and addiction challenges through its work to reduce barriers and ensure every Albertan has
access to high-quality recovery-oriented care to improve their well-being and help sustain recovery.

Key Objectives

1.1   Develop a new mental health and addiction system, as part of a refocused health
      system, to better support Albertans experiencing mental health and addiction
      challenges.

Refocusing the health care system
In November 2023, Alberta’s government announced an initiative to refocus Alberta’s health care
system, striving to enhance health outcomes for Albertans and empower health care workers to
deliver exceptional care across the province. Throughout 2024-25, the Government of Alberta
unveiled four new provincial health agencies, including Recovery Alberta, the provincial health
agency responsible for delivering mental health, addiction, and correctional health services.
To help ensure continuity and stability during this significant transition, the Ministry of Mental
Health and Addiction received an initial transfer of $1.13 billion from the Ministry of Health. In
addition to Recovery Alberta, the Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence (CoRE)—a provincial
statutory corporation dedicated to evaluation and research—was established.

The refocusing initiative represents whole-system transformational change, enabling Alberta’s
government to build a robust, accessible, and fully integrated mental health and addiction system
capable of effectively supporting individuals in their pursuit of recovery. Through a unified effort,
the Department of Mental Health and Addiction, Recovery Alberta, and CoRE are strategically
                                            directing resources to enhance the quality,
  In April 2024, the Ministry of Mental     effectiveness, and efficiency of mental health and
  Health and Addiction held four            addiction services in alignment with the Alberta
  engagement sessions with Alberta          Recovery Model. This work helps ensure Albertans have
  Health Services staff and partners        seamless access to comprehensive support across the
  to share information about Recovery       continuum of care—from prevention and early
  Alberta and respond to participant        intervention to treatment and recovery.
  questions about the upcoming
  transition. This was an important         Establishing Recovery Alberta
  first opportunity for staff to receive    The creation of Recovery Alberta builds upon the
  information, ask questions, and hear      Government of Alberta’s extensive efforts since 2019 to
  directly from the Minister,               develop the Alberta Recovery Model. Prioritizing mental
  department and emerging provincial        health and addiction services through the refocusing
  health agency. A total of 1,719           initiative is helping to ensure these services receive the
  listeners participated, with 523          attention needed to effectively address the addiction
  comments or questions submitted,          crisis and provide essential support for those
  either online or by telephone.            experiencing mental health challenges.

In May 2024, the Health Statutes Amendment Act, 2024 received royal assent, facilitating the
transition from a single regional health authority—Alberta Health Services—to an integrated



18                                                     Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis



network of sector-based provincial health agencies: acute care, primary care, continuing care,
and mental health and addiction services. The act included the following key amendments to the
Regional Health Authorities Act to further health system refocusing:

• Change the name of the Regional Health Authorities Act to the Provincial Health Agencies Act.
• Clarify the roles and responsibilities of the new provincial health agencies.
• Facilitate the transfer of staff from AHS to the new provincial health agencies, while offering
    stability for the workforce, unions, and government throughout implementation of the health
    system refocusing initiative.

Recovery Alberta was legally established as the provincial health agency for the mental health and
addiction health services sector—the first of four new provincial health agencies—effective
July 1, 2024, reporting to the Minister of Mental Health and Addiction. Within the province’s mental
health and addiction system, Recovery Alberta is the primary service provider.

On September 1, 2024, Recovery Alberta officially commenced operations under the Recovery
Alberta banner, with responsibility for delivering mental health, addiction, and correctional health
services to Albertans in a variety of service settings across the province, including:

•   Acute care (emergency services; inpatient psychiatric care in hospitals)
•   Outpatient (community health clinics and walk-in services)
•   Virtual (Virtual Opioid Dependency Program; addiction and mental health helplines)
•   Medical withdrawal management (detoxification services)
•   Standalone psychiatric (targeted designated psychiatric services, primarily bed-based inpatient
    care)
• Community outreach (addiction and mental health counselling; mental health promotion)
• Community bed-based (addiction treatment; complex service needs)

Recovery Alberta is also accountable for all health services within 10 provincial correctional
facilities including providing primary care services such as vaccines, emergency response,
pharmacy, urgent dental care, and addiction and mental health care.

Upon launching, Recovery Alberta successfully transitioned more than 10,000 AHS staff and
approximately 800 physicians into the new provincial health agency without disrupting patient or
client care. Services remained consistently stable and accessible across the province, provided by
the same dedicated frontline staff in familiar locations, with no increase in wait times. Throughout
the transition, Recovery Alberta delivered, partnered, or managed contracts for approximately
1,350 community mental health beds; 1,650 psychiatric beds; and 1,350 addiction treatment,
medical withdrawal management, and recovery beds. Mental health services and supports
continued to be provided at more than 130 outpatient community clinics and virtual teams,
alongside health services delivered in 10 provincial correctional facilities. In 2024-25, Recovery
Alberta spent $1.5 billion ($900 million between September 2024 and March 2025) to deliver
mental health and addiction services to Albertans, which is an increase of $100 million compared to
budget. The spending breakdown includes $149.5 million for acute care, $189.1 million for
outpatient services, $900,000 for virtual services, $96.8 million for medical withdrawal
management, $22.7 million for standalone psychiatric services, $42.8 million for community
outreach, and $472.3 million for community bed-based care. This increase in spending is related to
new investment in beds and expanded services, and staffing pressures and costs relating to the
increased acuity of patients requiring constant care.


Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                               19
Results Analysis



Recovery Alberta’s priorities for 2025-26 include:

•    Providing programs and services in line with its mandate.
•    Ensuring Albertans have access to safe, quality programs and services.
•    Finalizing a service delivery model for compassionate intervention.
•    Continuing to build and support an engaged, highly skilled workforce.
•    Publishing its first health and business plan.
•    Developing outcome measures and a long-range performance measurement framework.
•    Participating in system-wide, long-range planning with the department and CoRE.
•    Continuing to support Alberta’s health system refocusing activities.

Establishing CoRE
In April 2024, Alberta’s government announced its intention to create CoRE, providing an initial
budget of $5 million to support the organizational stand up and to initiate work aimed at finding
the most effective ways to support recovery and transform how it is understood and achieved.
CoRE's creation reinforces the Government of Alberta’s ongoing commitment to ensure those
experiencing mental health and addiction challenges receive high-quality, recovery-oriented care
informed by robust data and evidence-based practices.

In June 2024, the Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence Act was proclaimed, establishing CoRE as
a statutory corporation reporting to the Minister of Mental Health and Addiction. CoRE began
operating immediately with a mission to empower decision-makers with data and evidence to
support people with mental health or addiction issues in their pursuit of recovery. This work is
being advanced through four aims:

• System level evaluation and research to improve and build upon recovery-oriented systems of
     care for those with mental illness or addiction.
• Comprehensive data and analytics to identify new insights that can improve outcomes.
• Expert advice and guidance on effective recovery-focused mental health and addiction
     programs, including practical policy recommendations, clinical practice guidelines, and quality
     standards.
• Leadership and collaboration on recovery-oriented systems of care to enable the best possible
     outcomes for Albertans.
Ongoing rigorous evaluation and analysis of the Alberta Recovery Model is expected to inform best
practices, support the development of data-driven policies in mental health and addiction, and
continue to evolve the mental health and addiction system to one that is person-centred and
focused on producing strong outcomes for Albertans on the path to recovery.

Since launching and through March 31, 2025, CoRE:

• Operationalized the new organization including human resources, finance, governance,
     corporate, and legal responsibilities.
• Recruited 20 full-time equivalents (FTEs) to deliver on CoRE’s mandate to support
     decision-making with research, data, and evidence.
• Engaged experts to inform the development of quality standards for bed-based addiction
     treatment services.


20                                                        Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



• Launched the first of 12 guidance documents promoting practical initiatives to foster and
   sustain recovery friendly workplaces with the remaining to be completed in 2025-26.
• Published a policy white paper with evidence-based recommendations to inform Alberta’s
   compassionate intervention strategies for severe addiction.

CoRE measures its success across the following domains: advancing knowledge, building capacity,
informing decision-making, impacting health and health systems, and impacting broad economic
and societal outcomes. In 2025-26, CoRE will work to build internal capacity to continue progress
on priorities identified in its business plan (https://recoveryexcellence.org/wp-content/uploads/
2025/02/2025-28-Business-Plan-Final.pdf), validate system-level evaluation and research needs
and direction, and advance data access to enable evaluation of recovery-oriented systems of care.

1.2 Expand mental health and addiction system oversight to reduce barriers and ensure
    every Albertan has access to high-quality recovery-oriented care to improve their
    overall well-being and help sustain recovery.

Overseeing the mental health and addiction system
The transformation of Alberta’s mental health and addiction system is based on the belief that
recovery is possible, and that anyone struggling with mental health or addiction challenges
deserves the opportunity to pursue recovery and live a purpose-filled life. This drives the vision for
Alberta’s mental health and addiction system: that every Albertan dealing with mental health and
addiction challenges is supported in their pursuit of recovery through a full continuum of
recovery-oriented services and supports. The ministry’s efforts to build strong system oversight,
foster collaboration and integration, and develop a clear and actionable path forward for the
system are helping make progress toward achieving this vision.

Over the past year, the ministry took significant steps to advance Alberta’s overarching mental
health and addiction system with a goal to strengthen consistency of care and make life better for
those experiencing mental health and addiction challenges. One of the key accomplishments was
the delineation of clear roles and responsibilities within the mental health and addiction system.
Each entity within the Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction has a unique role in helping to
ensure the refocused mental health and addiction system is effective, efficient, and working to
advance the Alberta Recovery Model:

• The Department of Mental Health and Addiction oversees system planning, policy, legislation,
   funding, and capital planning.
• Recovery Alberta coordinates, monitors, and delivers mental health, addiction, and correctional
   health services.
• CoRE provides critical support through evaluation, research, knowledge sharing, and system
   performance monitoring.

In 2024-25, Recovery Alberta and CoRE received mandate letters outlining strategic priorities and
accountabilities. The ministry began developing an outcomes framework to define the mental
health and addiction system's purpose, vision, goals, and desired outcomes, aiming to create a
recovery-oriented system that meets Albertans' needs with compassion and innovation.

Collaborative system planning work was initiated to guide service, program, and capacity planning
for implementing the Alberta Recovery Model. This will align strategies to address challenges like
increased service demand and workforce pressures, transforming mental health and addiction
care. Success relies on collaboration across ministries, agencies, service providers,



Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                21
Results Analysis



health professionals, private sector partners, and Indigenous leaders, ensuring an integrated,
inclusive, and accessible recovery-oriented system.

The Mental Health Review Panel Roster is a provincial adjudicative agency responsible for
protecting the rights of patients detained in facilities and individuals subject to community
treatment orders under the Mental Health Act. The agency reports directly to the Minister of Mental
Health and Addiction. Each panel includes a lawyer, a psychiatrist, and a member of the public.

2024-25 Mental Health Review Panel Roster geographical breakdown

       Location         Chairs/Vice Chairs          Psychiatrists        Public Members              Total

    Edmonton/North             2 (33%)                10 (43%)                14 (47%)             26 (44%)

    Central                    2 (33%)                 1 (4%)                  4 (13%)              7 (12%)

    Calgary/South              2 (33%)                12 (52%)                12 (40%)             26 (44%)

    Total                         6                      23                       30                   59


Application hearings can occur in person, or by phone or videoconference and can be made to:

•    Cancel admission or renewal certificates for patients who are detained in a designated facility.
•    Order a facility to issue a community treatment order.
•    Return a patient to a correctional facility.
•    Cancel community treatment orders.
• Cancel a certificate of incompetence to make treatment decisions.
• Order the administration of treatment to patients who object to it.

Most applications are heard within 21 days of receipt and decisions are made within 24 hours of
hearing the application. In 2024-25, the percentage of applications heard within 21 days was
82.8 per cent.

In 2024-25, the number of applications and completed hearings remained relatively stable, with
3,654 applications for review panel hearings and 2,257 hearings held compared to
3,516 applications and 2,264 hearings in 2023-24. In the upcoming year, the ministry will conduct
a required review of the Mental Health Review Panel Roster to assess whether its structure and
operations can be modernized for continuous improvement, with recommendations aimed at
strengthening Alberta’s recovery-oriented system of care.

Supporting workforce development and capacity building initiatives
Alberta’s government is committed to strengthening the recovery-oriented system of care by
building workforce capacity for mental health and addiction services in alignment with the Alberta
Recovery Model. The Recovery Training Institute of Alberta (RTIA), established in July 2024 and
operated by ROSC Solutions Group Inc., provides practical skills and recovery-focused training for
individuals employed in publicly funded recovery communities, addiction treatment centres,
correctional services, and related recovery-oriented roles. Since opening and through
March 31, 2025, 52 people have received on-site training at the RTIA, including 35 recovery
community employees, 13 Indigenous community leaders and four other recovery professionals.




22                                                         Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                           Results Analysis



The RTIA also offers online education, training, and professional development, including targeted
skill development for correctional services staff working in Therapeutic Living Units (TLUs) and
Transition Services. In 2024-25, 20 individuals from the Calgary Correctional Centre TLU
completed training. Additional targeted support was provided to program teams from the five
Indigenous communities establishing recovery communities on their lands, including orientation to
Alberta’s recovery community model and guidance on operational planning aligned with their
unique strengths and healing approaches. This support will continue until the facilities open.

In 2024-25, the Department of Mental Health and Addiction provided nearly $1.2 million to
support operationalization of the RTIA and continued programming. This funding has resulted in
more individuals gaining the knowledge and skills necessary to make a meaningful impact in
recovery-oriented care and the lives of Albertans. Looking ahead to 2025-26, the RTIA will expand
its offerings by collaborating with community partners and industry experts to host specialized
learning sessions in response to the evolving needs of Alberta’s recovery communities and broader
mental health and addiction system.

Recovery coaches are trained peer workers, often with lived experience, who provide a range of
non-medical, non-clinical support to individuals in their pursuit of recovery. Operating both
virtually and in person, they provide a critical service, helping more people lead fulfilling lives in
long-term recovery in alignment with the Alberta Recovery Model. To support Albertans in
achieving their recovery goals, recovery coaches:

• Facilitate system navigation and streamlined referrals to help individuals access appropriate
   recovery programs.
• Help individuals develop recovery wellness plans tailored to their unique needs and hold them
   accountable to their plan.
• Offer ongoing support, guidance, motivation, and encouragement through regular one-on-one
   sessions.
• Help individuals build coping strategies and resilience.
• Provide transitional assistance for individuals who are re-entering the community after leaving
   structured programs.
• Connect participants with community resources and support networks.
• Reduce the burden on emergency health care services through intervention and referral to
   appropriate treatment.

Recognizing the increasing demand for recovery support to prevent relapse or escalation of
addiction, nearly $2.4 million was invested in 2024-25 to enhance availability and accessibility of
recovery coach services. Recovery coach teams were integrated into the Edmonton and Calgary
Navigation and Support Centres and introduced at the Safe Harbour shelter in Red Deer, providing
critical support to marginalized individuals. Recovery coaches made more than 2,000 client
connections and referrals during this period.

In 2024-25, the Department of Mental Health and Addiction provided $1 million to ROSC Solutions
Group Inc. to establish the Recovery Coach Academy of Canada within the RTIA to help expand
Alberta’s recovery-oriented workforce through cultural awareness, lived experience, and ethical,
participant-centred care. Launched in April 2024, the Recovery Coach Academy of Canada offers
specialized training and skill development programming for recovery coaches at no cost for
approved individuals. As of March 31, 2025, more than 520 people have completed training and
courses offered by the Recovery Coach Academy of Canada.



Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                    23
Results Analysis




Recovery Coach Academy of Canada training enrolment by location


                                             Medicine Hat
                                                 4%
                                                              Lethbridge
                                                                 7%

                                                                           Lakeview (Gunn) 8%
            Rural Communities
                   29%
                                                                            Grande Prairie
                                                                                 4%




                                                                              Edmonton
                                                                                20%
                        Calgary
                         28%


In September 2024, the Virtual Recovery Coaching Centre was established, staffed by professionals
certified through the Recovery Coach Academy of Canada, to support individuals in recovery from
substance use and addiction and awaiting treatment placement at a recovery community. As of
March 31, 2025, the Centre provided virtual coaching to 229 waitlisted participants, with
136 actively engaging in sessions, 44 successfully completing addiction treatment, and an average
coaching duration of 46.8 days. Participant engagement continued to grow, reaching over
340 active participants in February 2025, including new participants—a 10 per cent increase from
January 2025. Over the coming year, approximately 250 additional recovery coaches are expected
to be trained to meet the target of 500 coaches by March 31, 2026, including recovery coaches
needed to support compassionate intervention.

The ministry is continuing to collaborate with partner ministries to support targeted capacity
building programs and projects that will enhance Alberta’s recovery-oriented system of care and
provide mental health and addiction support to more people in need. In 2024-25, the Ministry of
Mental Health and Addiction worked with the Ministry of Health to implement the Health
Workforce Strategy. The strategy focuses on recruitment, retention and support, as well as
education and training for health care workers, including in the mental health and addiction sector.
The ministry also collaborated with the Ministry of Advanced Education to add more mental health
professional spaces in Alberta post-secondary institutions. In August 2024, Advanced Education
announced $10 million in post-secondary seat expansion funding for mental health professional
education programs. This will create 761 new seats in various high-demand mental health
programs over three years, such as psychiatric nursing, psychology, social work, child and youth
care, and addiction counselling. These opportunities will help ensure consistent high-quality
services are available in communities across the province while preparing a new generation of
mental health professionals to meet emerging needs.

Improving data and evidence for decision making
The Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction is committed to improving the sector’s evidence base
to inform decision making and effective policy development. CoRE is responsible for conducting
system level evaluation and research to improve and build upon recovery-focused systems of care


24                                                      Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                Results Analysis



and evaluating policies, programs, and services within the mental health and addiction system.
Recovery Alberta’s evaluation activities relate to service delivery, ensuring the mental health,
addiction, and correctional health services delivered are aligned with the Alberta Recovery Model
and provide the desired impact and value to Albertans. The department’s evaluation activities
relate to oversight functions, ensuring policy and legislation supports Alberta’s recovery-oriented
system of care and that funded programs provide a good return for the investment.

Looking ahead, the ministry will focus on facilitating coordinated evaluation and research
activities, continuing to expand its evidence base, fostering a culture of continuous improvement,
and ensuring that all programs and policies are aligned with the Alberta Recovery Model.

Ministry evaluation, research, and measurement activities (completed, underway, and planned)

  CoRE                    • Developing a comprehensive system-level performance measurement
                              framework. This is a joint endeavour by CoRE, the department, and
                              Recovery Alberta with input from stakeholders and experts across the
                              province intended to measure progress toward achieving goals identified
                              through the system planning work (early planning was initiated in 2024-25
                              with work continuing into 2025-26).
                          • Continuing to develop expert guidance to inform quality and licensing
                              standards for bed-based addiction treatment services (2025-26 and beyond).
                          • Advancing survey science to determine rates of mental illness and addiction
                              as well as pathways to recovery (2025-26 and beyond).
                          • Evaluating outcomes related to the Alberta Recovery Model programs and
                              services (ongoing).

  Recovery Alberta        • Evaluating and measuring grant-based initiatives such as overdose
                             prevention services and the VODP (ongoing).
                          • Provisioning data for broader ministry evaluation activities (ongoing).
                          • Comprehensively evaluating Narcotic Transition Services (2025) and the
                             Medical Detoxification and Residential Addiction Treatment Expansion
                             (MDRATE) project focusing on the scope of service delivery (2025-26).
                          • Evaluating addiction and mental health clinical services for post-secondary
                             institutions focusing on standardization of service delivery (2025-26 and
                             beyond).
                          • Routinely evaluating efforts to improve specific operational areas of delivery,
                             including those that span all services, e.g., client experience (ongoing).

  Department              • Providing foundational support to CoRE’s leadership by planning the
                              evaluation work, assessing evaluability, and helping establish the conditions
                              necessary for a comprehensive and collaborative evaluation of the
                              compassionate intervention initiatives.
                          • Initiated baseline work to support CoRE’s evaluation of recovery
                              communities, including aligning outcome reporting requirements to enable
                              consistent and meaningful measurement (initiated in 2024-25, continuing
                              into 2025-26).




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                         25
Results Analysis



                        • Assessing the impact of urban-focused initiatives on the health care and
                            correctional systems and perceptions of safety in downtown areas of Calgary
                            and Edmonton (initiated in 2024-25, continuing into 2025-26).
                        • Building insights about Alberta’s addiction and mental health initiatives
                            through creative use of cross-government and partner data holdings.

Comprehensive data linking is subject to legislative and privacy-based constraints, which must be
considered and navigated. In 2024-25, the department, CoRE, and Recovery Alberta became full
custodians of relevant health administrative data under the Health Information Act to guarantee
consistent data flows to meet the data needs of the ministry. The ministry also made progress on
several important initiatives aimed at improving data quality to better inform decision making and
policy development to advance the Alberta Recovery Model. All identified initiatives will continue
into 2025-26.

• Exploring opportunities to align grant agreement reporting requirements with
     recovery-oriented outcomes to demonstrate programs and services’ effectiveness in supporting
     the Alberta Recovery Model.
• Conducting data linkage for health service utilization among navigation centre clients in
     collaboration with Recovery Alberta and Seniors, Community and Social Services to understand
     their mental health and addiction-related needs, and identify potential service gaps to facilitate
     coordinated decision-making, policy development, and program implementation within and
     across ministries.
• Transitioning the Alberta Substance Use Surveillance System (ASUSS) from Alberta Health to the
     department to enable full access to timely substance use data for faster and accurate responses
     and ensuring availability of data for surveillance purposes.

ASUSS—accessible through https://www.alberta.ca/substance-use-surveillance-data—is a
publicly available online reporting dashboard containing point in time, comprehensive
system-level population data related to substance use in Alberta, including opioid and other
substance-related deaths, Emergency Medical Services (EMS) responses to opioid-related events,
naloxone kit distribution, hospitalizations and emergency department visits, and high-level details
about location of overdose deaths. ASUSS data helps the ministry monitor and analyze trends
related to the Alberta Recovery Model to understand whether desired outcomes are being
achieved. It also provides valuable insight that informs the ministry’s decision making and strategic
direction regarding supports for individuals experiencing addiction. The trends observed in Alberta
are regularly compared with trends observed in other jurisdictions to provide an understanding of
addiction challenges on a broader scale. While it is still early in the health care system
transformation, data from ASUSS is demonstrating positive trends for several key system
indicators, for example, in the 2024 calendar year:

• Recovery Alberta’s opioid dependency program supported a record number of nearly
     12,300 unique clients, including VODP, compared to almost 11,500 unique clients in 2023,
     an increase of seven per cent.
• Opioid deaths per 100,000 population decreased by 37 per cent compared to 2023.
• Deaths from methamphetamine, alcohol and cocaine were down significantly compared to 2023.
• Opioid-related emergency department visits declined by 26 per cent and the number of opioid-
     related hospitalizations reduced by 16 per cent compared to 2023.




26                                                        Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



In 2024-25, the ministry began exploring ways to improve and expand ASUSS to increase public
accessibility and comprehension, e.g., simplifying terminology and incorporating VODP visits to
reinforce the commitment to transparency and accountability and ensure all aspects of a client's
care are accounted for and every interaction contributes to their overall well-being. As individuals
accessing opioid dependency program services have access to a range of supports beyond
treatment interventions, the expanded data gives a more comprehensive look at the care journey of
those accessing the program.

1.3 Develop strategic approaches, including a Compassionate Intervention Framework, to
    expand access to timely and appropriate mental health and addiction services across
    the province to support individuals who are a danger to themselves or others.

Advancing compassionate intervention
Alberta’s government remains committed to addressing addiction, protecting lives, and enhancing
community safety. Following policy approval in May 2024, the Ministry of Mental Health and
Addiction began developing compassionate intervention legislation, actively engaging government
partners and community stakeholders to ensure robust safeguards are in place to respect civil
liberties and personal rights, while providing comprehensive, recovery-oriented treatment. This
legislative framework is designed to support individuals facing severe substance use and addiction
issues who have not benefited from conventional, voluntary treatment options.

The Compassionate Intervention Act, introduced in April 2025, aims to provide essential support to
individuals at the highest risk—those whose substance use causes harm to themselves or others
and who need serious interventions to ensure their safety and well-being. A Compassionate
Intervention Commission will be established as an independent adjudicative body responsible for
making decisions about addiction assessments and care plans. The Commission will consist of
qualified professionals, including lawyers, physicians, and public representatives, which may
include people who identify as Indigenous, have lived experience, or who have supported those
with lived experience to help ensure diverse perspectives and expertise guide decisions about
patient care and intervention.

Compassionate intervention will allow adult family members, guardians, health care professionals,
peace or police officers, or social workers to request a treatment order for those whose addiction
or substance use has made them a danger to themselves or others. Eligible individuals will receive
assessment, stabilization, treatment, and aftercare support. By enabling timely, targeted, life-saving
interventions, the Government of Alberta is helping ensure that vulnerable individuals receive
critical care and treatment when it is most needed—when they have lost the capacity to make these
decisions on their own.

In 2024-25, the ministry initiated detailed planning to ensure the necessary regulatory and service
delivery frameworks are ready to implement compassionate intervention effectively within
Alberta’s broader recovery-oriented system of care. As part of this comprehensive effort, two
dedicated compassionate intervention centres for adults and one for youth are being planned to
provide secure care for those experiencing severe addiction challenges who present a substantial
harm to themselves or others. Planning is underway with Recovery Alberta to deliver a
compassionate intervention service delivery model (see Key Objective 2.1 for further details on this
work). Once implemented, this framework is expected to significantly improve individual health
outcomes, enhance public safety, and reduce pressure on emergency and justice system resources.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                27
Results Analysis



1.4 Continue to advance treatment referral pathways in the criminal justice system and
    support initiatives to expand police services’ access to tools that support Albertans’
    wellness and recovery while keeping communities safe.

Providing treatment and recovery supports for people in the justice system
Therapeutic Living Units (TLUs) provide Albertans in custody the opportunity to initiate voluntary,
holistic evidence-based addiction treatment in a therapeutic community environment adapted for a
correctional setting. Operated by Beccarian Correctional Care, these specialized units in provincial
correctional facilities are available to eligible inmates who demonstrate a high need for treatment
and are anticipated to remain in custody for 90 days or more. The goal of the program is to protect
communities and prevent individuals from reverting to substance use or criminal activity. This is
achieved by helping program participants build recovery capital.

In 2024-25, the Department of Mental Health and Addiction and Ministry of Public Safety and
Emergency Services invested a combined total of $11 million to sustain TLU operations and
transition services. All four planned TLUs—Red Deer Remand Centre, Lethbridge Correctional
Centre, Fort Saskatchewan Correctional Centre, and Calgary Correctional Centre—were fully
operational by November 2024. Since opening and through March 31, 2025, 299 Albertans have
been admitted to the four TLUs in Alberta: 60 per cent of those admitted completed 75 days of
treatment and nearly half stayed over 90 days, with many ending programming due to their
planned release from corrections.

Individuals who take part in the TLU program prepare for life outside the TLU near the end of their
release. The final phase is focused on preparing individuals for admission to a recovery community
and to engage in a formal vocational linkage program for approximately six months. Transitioning
to a recovery community following release is voluntary. In 2024-25, 29 per cent of Albertans who
completed the TLU program transitioned to recovery communities and the remaining 71 per cent
transitioned to other community programs or returned to the community with their families.

Select remand facilities across Alberta provide specialized transition services that connect
individuals in custody with recovery coaches who encourage positive behavioural changes and
assist with referrals and warm handoffs to community-based recovery supports. Since opening in
June 2024, and through March 31, 2025, transition services at Calgary, Edmonton, Peace River,
and Medicine Hat had assessed almost 600 clients, with nearly 130 actively engaged in ongoing
support. More than 30 clients successfully transitioned to TLUs and recovery communities to
initiate treatment programming.

Alberta was the first province to offer immediate access to addiction treatment for individuals
detained by police. In partnership with the Virtual Opioid Dependency Program (VODP), health
care practitioners, such as on-site paramedics within police and RCMP detainment units, facilitate
prompt connection to opioid agonist treatment for individuals in withdrawal from opioid use.
Existing partnerships include police services in Edmonton, Calgary, Lethbridge, and 111 RCMP
detachments throughout the province. In addition, on-site clinicians and mental health navigators
in Edmonton and Calgary provide secure intake, assessment, and service referrals for those
presenting with addiction and/or mental health issues.

The Department of Mental Health and Addiction has invested more than $2.1 million over two
years (2023-24 and 2024-25) to support on-site paramedic services within police and RCMP
detainment units in Lethbridge, Red Deer, and Grande Prairie. In 2024-25, there were more than
2,000 referrals to VODP from police services and RCMP detachments and more than 1,700 opioid
agonist treatment starts for people detained in custody (further information on the VODP is
provided in Key Objective 3.5).



28                                                    Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                           Results Analysis



Recovery Alberta’s Opioid Agonist Treatment in Corrections Facilities program aims to enhance
accessibility and continuity of opioid agonist treatment and psychosocial supports in all 10 adult
and youth provincial correctional and remand centres by:

• Increasing initiation and maintenance on opioid agonist treatment for individuals with opioid
   use disorder.
• Decreasing maintenance assessment wait times.
• Enhancing access to addiction counselling for individuals with opioid use disorder.
• Partnering with Corrections and Law Enforcement agencies to support transitions to
   community treatment upon release.

This program is part of an ongoing effort to improve access to services for people in correctional
settings in alignment with the Alberta Recovery Model. In 2024-25, Recovery Alberta spent nearly
$4.2 million to support this program. There were more than 3,500 opioid agonist treatment starts
for those in corrections in 2024-25 and 1,000 people who were receiving treatment in the
community maintained opioid agonist treatment upon admission to correctional and remand
centres. All individuals meeting criteria for opioid use disorder who accepted treatment started in
less than 24 hours after admission. Recovery Alberta referred more than 4,000 people who
received or requested opioid agonist treatment in a correctional facility to an addiction counsellor
for either group or individual treatment and provided handoffs to community treatment providers
for more than 4,500 people released to the community.

The VODP partners with correctional health services to enable transitions in treatment for clients
released from incarceration to avoid disruptions to their established treatment plan. Individuals
released from correctional facilities are at significant risk for overdose, particularly within the first
week after release. The partnership between the VODP and correctional health services can help
prevent individuals from reoffending and offers wraparound health and social supports to address
their unique needs. In 2024-25, the VODP completed more than 2,200 consults for treatment
transition referrals for clients in correctional health services.

Partnering with police to connect vulnerable Albertans with supports
HealthIM is a digital tool that equips police officers with essential resources to effectively manage
mental health crises. In providing real-time assessments and de-escalation information, HealthIM
enhances officer response capabilities for mental health calls and increases public safety. In
2024-25, the Department of Mental Health and Addiction provided nearly $740,000 to support the
continued operation of HealthIM in collaboration with the Ministry of Public Safety and Emergency
Services. As of March 31, 2025, HealthIM was used in eight police services and in all four RCMP
districts across the province. The tool has been successfully rolled out to all interested police
services; further expansion anticipated in 2024-25 was not necessary. HealthIM was used in more
than 9,760 mental health related calls to police and the service logged almost 9,100 interactions
with Albertans in 2024-25, contributing to safer and more supportive interactions for people
experiencing mental health emergencies. Enhancements to the tool are ongoing to align with the
Mental Health Act and to strengthen the response to mental health crisis across the province.

Alberta’s government is committed to increasing public safety and supporting vulnerable
populations in Calgary and Edmonton by addressing underlying issues such as addiction, mental
health challenges, and homelessness. In 2024-25, the Department of Mental Health and Addiction
provided more than $5.5 million combined to fund targeted strategies and initiatives aimed at
tackling these issues. To improve clinical supports as part of these strategies, Recovery Alberta
spent $4 million to add more mental health clinicians and therapists to work alongside the police
services in the two cities.



Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                   29
Results Analysis



Police and Crisis Teams (PACT) operate in both Edmonton and Calgary, pairing police officers with
mental health professionals to respond to 911 calls involving mental health crisis. Operated in
partnership between Recovery Alberta and each city’s respective police service, PACT teams assess,
stabilize, and connect individuals in crisis with appropriate mental health services in the
community, helping divert them away from emergency departments or unnecessary involvement
with the justice system.

In Calgary, a team of 10 clinicians and one clinical supervisor support 10 PACT and PACT-related
teams throughout the city. Between July 1, 2024, and December 31, 2024, the Calgary PACT had
3,940 client interactions and engaged with 555 unique clients and 493 repeat clients. Teams
received 277 incoming referrals and conducted 319 outgoing referrals. In Edmonton, all new PACT
clinicians are embedded within Recovery Alberta’s Access 24/7. In 2024-25, 18 full time positions
were onboarded to enhance the Access 24/7 team to effectively support districts. The first
                                                  divisional PACT was launched in June 2024, and as
  In Calgary, 211 Alberta distress workers        of March 31, 2025, five out of six divisions have
  are integrated into Calgary 911 to              PACT, with support provided to the sixth division
  enhance crisis response and recovery            by the existing team. Between July and December
  outreach. Calls that are believed to be         2024, Edmonton PACT divisions had 820 client
  mental health and addiction related,            interactions and engaged with 679 unique clients
  including suicide crisis calls, are             and 134 repeat clients.
  transferred to these crisis workers who
  are trained in suicide prevention and           Regional Police and Crisis Teams (RPACT) is a
  crisis de-escalation and help identify the      partnership between Recovery Alberta and the
  right team to respond to calls. As of           Alberta RCMP that pairs mental health clinicians
  March 31, 2025, a total of 8,235 calls          with law enforcement to attend mental health
  have been responded to by the 211               crisis calls in rural, remote, and Indigenous
  crisis workers.                                 communities throughout Alberta that are serviced
                                                  by the RCMP. The goal of the initiative is to
increase access to mental health and addiction supports in underserved areas. Services provided
through RPACT include mental health assessments, community service referrals, counselling, case
planning and follow-up care through a combination of in-person and phone consultations to serve
Albertans in need more effectively and efficiently.

Over the past two years (2023-24 and 2024-25), Recovery Alberta has spent $1.3 million to
support the continued operation and expansion of RPACT to help increase access to mental health
supports and services in rural and remote Alberta communities. As of March 31, 2025, Recovery
Alberta supported 12 operational RPACT based in Airdrie, Athabasca, Camrose (in partnership with
Camrose Police Service), Coaldale, Drumheller, Gleichen, rural Grande Prairie, High Level, Hinton,
Strathcona and Parkland counties, and Wainwright that serve more than 85 communities
throughout the province.

There was a total of 1,886 referrals to RPACT in 2024-25 corresponding to 1,591 unique clients and
225 repeat clients. Of these referrals, 1,008 client interactions occurred, including crisis
assessments, medication administration, patient collateral visits, follow-up visits, telephone
encounters, and law enforcement support with general mental health apprehensions.

The Human-centred Engagement and Liaison Partnership (HELP) teams provide outreach services
to individuals experiencing unstable housing or homelessness who may also face mental health
and/or addiction challenges by connecting them to essential community resources and supports.
In Edmonton, the HELP unit is part of the Edmonton Police Service and is staffed with social service
navigators to support at-risk individuals by providing referrals, follow-ups, and case management
plans. Social service navigators are also embedded within the Edmonton Police Service Diversion
and Desistance Branch, which conducts proactive outreach to individuals with a history of causing


30                                                    Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                         Results Analysis



the greatest harm in the community. The goal is to help these individuals stabilize and reduce their
use of the health care services and justice systems. Navigators are contracted from social agencies
such as the Mustard Seed, Hope Mission, George Spady Society, Radius Health and Healing, and
Bent Arrow. In September 2024, HELP navigators were added from the Wihcihaw Maskokamik
Society from Enoch Cree Nation, adding to the continuum of care for Indigenous Peoples.

In 2024-25, the Edmonton HELP team received a total of 7,343 requests for services and the team
provided 5,048 referrals or warm handoffs to support programs with clients indicating housing,
addiction and mental health services, and identification cards as their top needs. In addition, a total
of 115 clients were served by the Diversion and Desistance Branch.

In Calgary, the HELP team is operated by Alpha House. The organization responds to substance use
and public intoxication issues when emergency services are not needed, which helps lessen the
demand on police, bylaw, hospital, and emergency medical services. The HELP team also facilitates
access and entry to shelters, health care, addiction treatment, and supportive housing. In 2024-25,
the Department of Mental Health and Addiction provided $500,000 to Alpha House to support
continued operation of the Beltline HELP team.

In 2024-25, the Calgary Beltline HELP team served 11,209 total clients and 2,200 unique clients,
responded to 4,845 service requests, provided 296 referrals, and completed 4,283 transports to
shelters, drug self-administration locations, or social service agencies.

1.5   Enhance quality standards and legislative requirements guiding regulatory oversight
      and enforcement to improve service provider accountability and protect communities
      and Albertans accessing services.

Improving legislation, regulations, and standards
Alberta’s government is working to provide the best mental health and addiction care by
continuously reviewing and updating policy and legislation to meet the evolving needs of Albertans.
Originally passed in 2018, the Mental Health Services Protection Act (MHSPA) provides a legislative
foundation for safe, quality mental health and addiction care in Alberta. The act regulates
bed-based addiction treatment services, narcotic transition services, supervised consumption
services (also known as drug consumption services), and psychedelic drug treatment services. The
Government of Alberta initiated amendments to the MHSPA in July 2024, with the aim to update the
standards for bed-based addiction treatment services to improve the quality and safety of care for
medical withdrawal management and treatment programs.

Amendments introduced in February 2025 position the act as framework legislation, significantly
strengthening the mental health and addiction system by enhancing regulatory oversight and
quality standards. These amendments categorize bed-based addiction treatment into three distinct
service types, each governed by separate licensing standards:

• Withdrawal management services: medically supervised services to manage or support an
   individual through the process of withdrawal from one or more substances.
• Intensive treatment services: intensive and structured residential care services for individuals
   with addiction.
• Non-intensive recovery services: services in a recovery-oriented environment that provide
   less-intensive treatment compared to intensive treatment services.

The legislation also includes administrative amendments to address regulatory inconsistencies,
clarify requirements, and better align the act with the Alberta Recovery Model. These changes will



Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                 31
Results Analysis



take effect in fall 2025, ensuring all Albertans accessing these services receive consistent and
effective care to support their recovery.

The Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction is actively engaged in cross-departmental
collaboration and analysis regarding Medical Assistance in Dying (MAID) led by the Ministry of
Justice. MAID is a legal process that allows an eligible person to receive assistance from a medical
practitioner in ending their life. Alberta’s government is reviewing how MAID is regulated to
ensure there is a consistent process as well as oversight that protects vulnerable Albertans,
specifically those living with disabilities or who have mental health challenges. In late 2024,
Alberta’s government conducted public engagement that will help inform planning and policy
decision making to establish supplementary safeguards, ensuring MAID remains an exceptional
process and protecting vulnerable Albertans from potential misuse. The Government of Canada has
temporarily paused expansion of MAID eligibility to include people facing depression or mental
illness until March 2027.

Since March 2024, Alberta’s government has been working with the College of Alberta
Psychologists and the Association of Counselling Therapy of Alberta to examine legislative
amendments to the Health Professions Act. This could put in place standards of practice, a code of
ethics, and minimum entry to practice requirements for Albertans who work as counsellors. Many
components of the policy development for regulating counsellors are being led by the profession
and is also dependent on the regulatory college being ready to register and regulate the profession.
Alberta’s government is committed to regulate this profession to ensure appropriate standards,
accountability and oversight are in place to support safe, high-quality patient care.

Ensuring Albertans receive safe, quality care
The Compliance and Monitoring unit provides crucial system oversight as the dedicated regulatory
enforcement body within the Department of Mental Health and Addiction. Current accountabilities
are related to adherence to legislative requirements and standards under the MHSPA, regulation,
and standards for four unique service types: residential addiction treatment services, drug
consumption services, narcotic transition services, and psychedelic drug treatment services.
Service providers who offer or provide regulated services meet core licensing requirements, giving
assurance that Albertans accessing these facilities receive safe, standardized, and high-quality care.
The unit conducts regular inspections, investigations, and follow-ups on reported incidents and
complaints to determine compliance and enforce as necessary. This proactive enforcement
approach reduces risk, ensuring providers either maintain compliance or cease operations to
prevent unregulated or unsafe practices.

The unit contributes to system-wide continuous improvement by identifying gaps in treatment
quality, safety, and compliance, providing valuable insights to legislative, policy, and program
development processes. Compliance and Monitoring works closely with policy and legislation
teams and has helped drive many aspects of the upcoming MHSPA amendment implementation.
The number of licences issued is expected to increase once the proposed amendments take effect.
The unit is also preparing for a new regulatory role in 2025-26 for compassionate intervention.
Work will continue over the next few years to plan for and replace the current database and
interim document portal with a more streamlined information technology solution, and to develop
interactive webpages to improve access to information for providers, clients, and the public.

As of March 31, 2025, the unit licensed and determined compliance for 132 locations operated by
68 providers across Alberta, representing an increase of 21 locations and nine service providers
over the year prior. This increase is attributed to licensing and inspections of psychedelic drug
treatment services that commenced in 2024-25 and an increase in applications for residential
addiction treatment service.



32                                                      Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                             Results Analysis



2024-25 Compliance and Monitoring Overview

                     Enforcement/Licensing Activity1                                                 Result

  Initial licensing inspections                                                                         17

  Renewal licensing inspections                                                                        119

  Exception (follow up) visits                                                                          20

  Consultations (information sharing, educational awareness)                                             8

  Investigations completed                                                                              14

  Inspector orders issued                                                                                3

  Non-compliances issued2                                                                              481

  Non-compliances rectified                                                                            370

  Licences issued                                                                                       88
1 Figures presented in the table exclude psychedelic drug treatment services. These services will be incorporated into the

tracking system over the coming year and will be included in reporting beginning in 2025-26.
2 A non-compliance occurs when the service provider has been unable to provide evidence to confirm compliance to a

requirement and may be issued through inspection, investigation, or follow up to a critical incident. Non-compliance
can vary in severity and therefore the enforcement measure also varies from a notice of deficiency that outlines all
non-compliances and the expected timeline for submitting required evidence, to an inspector order in circumstances
where the non-compliance presents an immediate threat to client health or safety, or a non-compliance has not been
resolved in required timelines. If a provider fails to comply with an inspector order, escalated enforcement measures
are taken (e.g., a court order, amending or canceling a licence).


Performance Measure 1.a:
     Mental health and addiction-related emergency department visits with no interaction
     with publicly funded mental health and addiction services in the previous two years
     (per cent)

                              Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                            2023-24             2023-24
                                                                                             Target              Actual
      2019-20                2020-21             2021-22               2022-23

       20.7%                 20.6%                19.6%                 19.5%                17.9%               19.7%

Source: Ministry of Health
Notes: Results lag by up to 10 months. Only the first visit is counted in a given fiscal year for individuals with multiple
emergency department visits. Individuals with invalid or missing PHNs and less than two years of eligibility under the
Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan are excluded.

Description: This performance measure describes the proportion of mental health or
addiction-related emergency department visits in a fiscal year with no interaction with publicly
funded mental health and addiction services (such as visits to physician office, emergency


Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                         33
Results Analysis



department visits, hospitalizations, and prescription drug dispensations for mental health or
addiction issues) in the previous two fiscal years.

Rationale: A decreasing score over time suggests improvement, indicating that individuals’ needs
are being addressed in the community, reducing reliance on the emergency department for
delivery of mental health and addiction related services.

Results and variance explanation: The result for this measure was 19.7 per cent in 2023-24,
which is 1.8 percentage points above the target of 17.9 per cent and only 0.2 percentage points
above the 2022-23 result of 19.5 per cent. Results from the previous fiscal years demonstrate a
gradual decreasing pattern.

The difference between the 2023-24 target and the actual result could reflect variation over time.
However, insufficient workforce support and capacity at the community level, along with barriers
affecting treatment and referral pathways from police services to mental health and addiction care,
could contribute to an increasing number of Albertans seeking emergency department care for
their mental health and addiction-related concerns. Alberta also experienced a record population
growth from April 2023 to April 2024, the highest among Canadian provinces, primarily driven by
immigration, which may have contributed to increased demand for health care services, including a
rise in emergency department visits for mental health and addiction needs.

The results for this measure from 2019-20 to 2023-24 have underscored the actual need for mental
health and addiction service use. Overall health care use decreased during the COVID-19 pandemic,
with a considerable decrease in physician visits and hospitalizations among individuals with
mental health and addiction issues. Natural disasters like wildfires and other emergency events
also impacted mental health and addiction needs, leading to an increase in emergency department
visits for such conditions. In addition, there are rural and remote areas in Alberta where mental
health and addiction services are not readily available in the community, leading residents in these
areas to rely on the emergency department for their mental health and addiction concerns.

Performance Indicator 1.b:
     Percentage of Albertans receiving care at an appropriate level (under development)

The performance indicator on the percentage of Albertans receiving care at an appropriate level
was originally designed to demonstrate how investment and cost-avoidance across multiple
systems can reduce the need for more costly and less effective interventions, but over time, this
indicator has evolved. In previous years, significant work was undertaken to explore the
development of a more meaningful measure of system impact, including leveraging the expertise of
the Recovery Expert Advisory Panel. The focus shifted in 2023-24 to better capture clients’
interactions with different programs, aiming to develop metrics that more effectively reflect the
holistic impact of the Alberta Recovery Model. Although the ministry conducted a preliminary
analysis of available data, this work was limited by legislative and privacy constraints.

In 2024-25, the performance indicator remained unchanged, consistent with a broader shift toward
long-term planning and system-wide improvements in performance measurement. Like 2023-24,
the analysis focused on VODP, drug consumption services, bed-based addiction services, and
mental health-related hospital admissions.

As part of the ministry’s ongoing evolution and maturation of performance measurement, this
indicator has been discontinued and will be replaced in 2025-26 with a new performance measure:
the percentage of individuals primarily admitted for more than 30 days to hospital inpatient care
for a mental health issue, which is more aligned with the outcome (Outcome 1 in the 2025-28
Business Plan). By focusing on hospital inpatient admissions over 30 days, the new indicator allows


34                                                    Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                             Results Analysis



the system to better assess whether individuals are receiving timely, appropriate care in the
community—before their needs escalate to the point of requiring prolonged hospitalization.

As Alberta continues to build a recovery-oriented system of care, efforts to reduce barriers to data
access are expected to support more holistic analyses of client pathways and outcomes across
sectors. This will strengthen the ministry’s ability to evaluate the long-term impact of
recovery-focused policies and programs in areas such as health, justice, education, and housing.
Over time, improved data integration may also support a better understanding of how individuals’
access and interact with services, contributing to more coordinated, person-centred care.

Preliminary results: In 2024-25, 17,335 Albertans received care from one or more of VODP, drug
consumption services, and bed-based addiction services—an increase of 1,237 individuals or
7.7 per cent, compared to 2023-24 (16,098 individuals). The increase may reflect reduced financial
barriers, greater public awareness, and the expansion and specialization of programs offering more
opportunities and individualized services. Bed-based addiction services comprise three distinct
services: withdrawal management, residential (intensive) treatment and residential recovery
services. In 2024-25, bed-based addiction services had the most clients, followed by VODP. Of the
clients enrolled and discharged from VODP, nearly 28 per cent were transitioned to another Opioid
Dependency Program (ODP) clinic and/or another prescriber within 30 days of discharge. This
represents a decrease of five percentage points compared to the previous year, when 33 per cent of
clients were transitioned. Such fluctuations can be expected, as clients may choose to transition
their care to their family physician or primary care provider instead of another ODP clinic or may
choose to transition to non-pharmaceutical treatment options. Data about drug consumption
services has some limitations because Personal Health Number (PHN) disclosure by a client is not
required to access these services, therefore clients who do not produce a validated PHN are
excluded from the data used for the analysis. However, PHN data quality has improved over recent
years, with PHN being provided nearly 90 per cent of the time, supporting more reliable reporting.

The Mental Health Act enables care for individuals with serious mental health illnesses who are at
significant risk of causing harm to themselves and/or to others. In 2024-25, the proportion of
individuals admitted three times or more to a hospital under the Mental Health Act was 7 per cent3
compared to 8.7 per cent4 in 2023-24—a decrease of 1.7 percentage points. The decrease could
suggest that more accessible and effective mental health care with appropriate prevention and
intervention supports are available in the community and barriers to access to care are being
reduced. The metric is included as performance indicator 4.a in the 2025-28 Mental Health and
Addiction Business Plan and will be reported on in detail in the ministry’s 2025-26 Annual Report.

In 2024-25, the proportion of individuals primarily admitted for more than 30 days to hospital
inpatient care for a mental health issue also decreased. This is a broader segment of people that is
not specific to admission through the Mental Health Act. The proportion of patients who had a
length of stay of more than 30 days for a mental health-related illness decreased from 16.9 per
cent4 in 2023-24 to 13.9 per cent3 in 2024-25. This decrease may reflect the positive effects of
enhanced community-based care and improved coordination between hospital and community
services, leading to more effective care and fewer long hospital stays. This metric is included as
performance measure 1.a in the 2025-28 Mental Health and Addiction Business Plan and will be
reported on in detail in the ministry’s 2025-26 Annual Report.




3 Figures reflects data available as of April 2, 2025, and may change once the full data set is available in June 2025.
4 Figure as been updated based on the release of additional data and does not match what was presented in the

2023-24 Mental Health and Addiction Annual Report.


Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                     35
Results Analysis



Outcome Two: Alberta’s communities and families have the capacity to support
individuals pursuing recovery
The Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction is working with government and community partners
to ensure consistent resources, supports, and services are available across the province to support
effective implementation of the Alberta Recovery Model. The ministry is responsible for building
recovery communities and mental wellness centres for children, youth, and adults and funding
their operation. This expansion is helping to remove barriers and provide better access to mental
health and addiction treatment and recovery services. The ministry is committed to enhancing the
continuum of culturally appropriate services available to Indigenous Peoples in Alberta and
building capacity in communities to support individuals to pursue recovery.

 Psychosocial supports during emergency events

 The Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction has developed a community psychosocial
 response plan to strengthen the Government of Alberta’s processes in addressing
 psychosocial needs during emergency events and ensure roles and responsibilities are clear
 in supporting Albertans during difficult times. Mental Health and Addiction and the Ministry of
 Seniors, Community and Social Services have crucial roles in the government’s coordinated
 psychosocial response during such emergencies—Mental Health and Addiction leads in
 overseeing Alberta’s recovery-oriented system of mental health and addiction care, and
 Seniors, Community and Social Services provides essential social supports, including
 financial benefits and emergency shelter, that contribute to the overall psychosocial
 well-being of affected populations.

 The Psychosocial Response and Recovery Coordination Team, co-chaired by the
 Department of Mental Health and Addiction and Recovery Alberta, coordinates
 communication and actions between levels of government, service providers, Indigenous
 communities, and municipalities impacted by disaster events to address the psychosocial
 needs of affected Albertans and to mitigate the psychological and social impacts of
 emergencies on vulnerable populations. Psychosocial supports coordinated at the provincial
 level with the local incident command during the 2024 Jasper Wildfires included information
 sharing about available supports and mental health services such as counselling, delivering
 peer-based first responder supports, providing on-site mental health and addiction staff at
 reception centres, and ensuring continuity of addiction treatment, harm reduction, and
 recovery services for Albertans evacuated from their communities.


Key Objectives

2.1   Expand oversight responsibility for and increase the number of mental health and
      addiction treatment facilities in Alberta to streamline service delivery and improve
      access to a consistent continuum of supports spanning prevention, intervention,
      treatment, and recovery.

Expanding access to bed-based addiction treatment
Bed-based addiction treatment in Alberta involves inpatient services where individuals remain
on-site for a designated length of time. These services are currently provided in recovery
communities and about 110 licenced facilities that provide short- and medium-term intensive and
non-intensive treatment and recovery services and medical withdrawal management services.
The Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction is building system capacity for addiction treatment



36                                                    Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis



services by establishing additional bed-based options for individuals with specific needs, including
compassionate intervention centres, and a youth and recovery centre.

Recovery communities are long-term (up to one year) bed-based treatment facilities offering
holistic rehabilitation and comprehensive supports in alignment with the Alberta Recovery Model.
They help individuals restore their physical, mental, and emotional health, rebuild relationships,
and develop life skills, while providing access to medical care (e.g. opioid agonist treatment),
counselling, vocational training, and financial and housing supports. Each client follows an
individualized care plan and is paired with a peer
mentor who is in later stages of recovery.
                                                      In early April 2025, the Lethbridge
As residents progress in their recovery, they take
                                                       Recovery Community received a
on increasing personal and social responsibility
                                                       community development award of merit
within the community. Extensive reintegration
                                                       from the Consulting Engineers of Alberta
supports—including employment training,
                                                       that recognized the innovative modular
continuing education opportunities, and
                                                       design of the recovery community, with
connections to community resources—ensure a
                                                       components built off-site and assembled
smoother transition back into society and set
                                                       on-site, providing adaptable, scalable
clients up for success in their recovery.
                                                       support tailored to diverse addiction
                                                       recovery needs.
The Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction has
committed to establish 11 recovery communities
                                                      The project also earned an Honourable
across the province, including five in direct
                                                       Mention for Permanent Modular
partnership with Indigenous communities, to
                                                       Healthcare award at the Modular Building
reduce barriers and improve access to recovery-
                                                       Institute’s 2025 World of Modular - Awards
oriented supports for more Albertans. About 700
                                                       of distinction in Las Vegas, which
new long-term addiction treatment beds will be
                                                       celebrates global excellence in modular
added and available to all Albertans when the 11
                                                       construction. The Red Deer Recovery
recovery communities are operational, helping
                                                       Community received the same award, as
more than 2,000 people over the age of 18 each
                                                       well as the Judge’s Choice, at the 2024
year in their pursuit of recovery and increasing
                                                       event in Florida.
the recovery capital in communities.

In 2024-25, Alberta’s government provided more than $106 million (more than $21 million in
operating and about $85.4 million in capital) to build and operate recovery communities
throughout Alberta. This includes an investment of about $72.5 million to build recovery
communities in partnership with Indigenous communities. As of March 31, 2025, recovery
communities in Red Deer, Lethbridge, and Lakeview at Gunn are operational. Collectively, these
facilities served a total of 412 unique individuals in 2024-25. Wait time data for the operational
recovery communities is not currently reported as the ministry plans to engage evaluation experts
and facility operators in 2025-26 to develop a standard suite of performance metrics and establish
a consistent reporting cadence that supports comparability across recovery community sites.

The Calgary Recovery Community is near completion and expected to open in summer 2025, and
the remaining sites in Edmonton, Grande Prairie, Blood Tribe, Enoch Cree Nation, Siksika Nation,
Tsuut’ina Nation, and with the Métis Nation of Alberta are in various stages of development (see
Key Objective 2.3 for details on the Indigenous partner recovery communities).




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                               37
Results Analysis



2024-25 Recovery Community Operations

                                          Red Deer                     Lethbridge                 Lakeview at Gunn

  Operator                           Edgewood Health             Fresh Start Recovery              ROSC Solutions
                                    Network Canada Inc                  Centre                       Group Inc

  Opened                                  May 2023                  September 2023                     July 2024

  Bed capacity                           75 beds                         50 beds                       75 beds
                                   (58 male, 17 female)                   (male)                        (male)

  Clients per year                        Up to 300                     Up to 200                      Up to 300

  Average length of stay
                                             153.6                         158                           56.9
  (days)1

  Total admissions                            180                          106                            170

  Total unique
                                              146                          101                            165
  admissions

  Total program
                                              78                            80                            542
  completions

  Key Results                      97.8 per cent of             92 per cent of clients           85 per cent of clients
                                   clients who completed        who completed the                who completed the
                                   the program secured          program secured safe             program connected
                                   safe housing and a           and stable housing               with ongoing treatment
                                   stable income                                                 providers, secured
                                                                                                 stable housing,
                                                                                                 returned to their own
                                                                                                 homes and/or reunited
                                                                                                 with their families
1 Average length of stay reported by Red Deer is based on admissions. Lethbridge and Gunn are based on discharge.

2 The Lakeview Recovery Community in Gunn has been operating for less than eight months and initially employed a

staggered intake approach. This accounts for the low level of successful completions recorded.

In February 2025, the Minister of Mental Health and Addiction announced plans to develop two
new compassionate intervention centres in the province to support the implementation of the
compassionate intervention legislation: the Southern Alberta Compassionate Intervention Centre
in Calgary and the Northern Alberta Compassionate Intervention Centre in Edmonton, each with
capacity for 150 beds.

The compassionate intervention centres are expected to serve as secure, multi-functional facilities
where patients over 18 years of age with complex addiction needs can access a spectrum of
bed-based treatment and supports, including assessment, medical withdrawal management and
stabilization, and individual and group therapy. Comprehensive discharge planning and aftercare
supports are critical to ensure individuals can successfully transition to community-based
supports, such as a recovery community or into outpatient treatment with appropriate secure
housing, to continue their recovery journey. Construction on these facilities is anticipated to begin



38                                                                Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



in 2026 and be completed in 2029. In 2025-26, the ministry will explore early implementation
options to begin delivering compassionate intervention services to the first patients in fall 2026.

In 2024-25, $5.9 million in capital funding was spent to support early planning activities for the
compassionate intervention centres, including initial work to develop new information technology
solutions to facilitate full implementation of compassionate intervention. Functional programming
for the facilities is complete, and procurement documents are being developed. With the
compassionate intervention legislation now passed, construction will move forward.

Announced in November 2024, the Northern Alberta Youth Recovery Centre is being built to
address the need for more bed-based addiction treatment capacity for youth, utilizing existing
infrastructure at the Edmonton Young Offenders Centre. The new centre will be separate from the
correctional facility with no shared living areas and will have its own dedicated entrance. Planned
renovations include a refreshed interior design, new clinical, educational, and office spaces, and
living units tailored for bed-based addiction treatment. These upgrades will create an environment
focused on health and wellness, following the model used throughout Alberta’s recovery-oriented
system of care. Leveraging existing infrastructure will reduce the timelines and costs for this new
facility, putting the centre on a path to open to clients in 2026. Upon completion, the Northern
Alberta Youth Recovery Centre will have a capacity of 105 beds and be able to serve up to
300 youth annually, increasing the total number of youth addiction treatment beds in Alberta from
70 to 175. In 2024-25, $1.1 million in capital funding was spent on planning, facility design, and
construction for this project, and the total budget to complete the build is $23 million.

Alberta’s government is committed to making addiction treatment accessible for Albertans in need
through the ongoing expansion of programs that build addiction treatment capacity as part of the
Alberta Recovery Model. This commitment extends beyond large scale projects like recovery
communities and compassionate intervention centres to localized initiatives that are adding
capacity on a smaller scale. Every new treatment space added to the system removes barriers,
improves access to services, and gives more people the opportunity to pursue recovery.

The George Spady Centre Society’s new medical withdrawal management facility is expected to
open in 2025. Supported by $8 million in funding over three years from the Government of Alberta,
the facility will offer a 41-bed unit, including 10 net-new beds, where clients will receive
self-directed individualized care to safely withdraw from substances. It will also provide
19 post-withdrawal management recovery beds, including nine net new, for individuals who have
completed the withdrawal management program but require additional non-clinical supports to
safely transition to their next care provider.

In 2024-25, more than $2.5 million supported additional bed-based expansion projects (see details
on people served through bed-based treatment in Key Objective 3.2), including:

• Renovating the Safe Harbour Society’s existing facility in Red Deer facility to add four new
   post-withdrawal management recovery beds in 2025.
• Operating 10 addiction recovery beds for men over the age of 18, with a capacity to support up
   to 40 clients per year at Opportunity Home Treatment and Recovery Centre in Drayton Valley.
• Opening seven youth/young adult addiction treatment beds at the Okisikow Iskwew Youth
   Addiction Center on Frog Lake First Nation in February 2025.
• Providing funding to open 20 adult recovery beds at the Northeast Addiction and Mental Health
   Centre for Holistic Recovery in Calgary.
• Opening 20 adult recovery beds in August 2024 at the Red Deer Dream Centre.



Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                 39
Results Analysis



• Adding two medical withdrawal management beds for a total of 23 beds, and four post-
     withdrawal management recovery beds at the Foothills Centre in Fort Macleod.
• Enhancing Indigenous programming and bringing bed rates up to the standard rates for medical
     withdrawal management, addiction treatment, and young adult addiction treatment beds at the
     Poundmaker’s Lodge Treatment Centres.

Expanding oversight responsibility for mental health and addiction treatment
facilities
The Department of Mental Health and Addiction is expanding oversight responsibility for mental
health and addiction treatment facilities by developing and implementing a right-touch approach to
quality assurance and oversight. In 2024-25, the department’s Compliance and Monitoring unit
developed a regulatory model based on the “right-touch approach” stressing engagement with
service providers that is relational, fair, transparent, and professional. The approach transcends the
MHSPA and can be applied to any regulatory, oversight, or quality assurance framework,
facilitating overarching government or ministry objectives such as the Alberta Recovery Model.
The embedded risk-matrix approach ensures any action taken is consistent, proportional, and
effective at mitigating unnecessary health and safety risks to Albertans early and to the fullest
extent possible. The model is expected to roll out in 2025-26.

2.2    Invest in mental health facility expansion to increase access to a suite of
       community-based mental health services across the province that provide consistent
       supports to youth experiencing mental illness.

Building mental health system capacity
The Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction is investing in prevention and early intervention
programs that focus on youth mental health and building resiliency, and ensuring specialized
treatment is available for youth who require more intensive support.

Kickstand Centres (https://mykickstand.ca/) make it easier for youth to find help and access
support in their community. These fully integrated centres serve as a hub, or single point of access,
for youth aged 11 to 25 and offer a range of no-cost, confidential supports spanning mental health
and addiction services, primary health care, social services (such as employment, recreation, and
life-skills programs), peer support, and Indigenous wellness supports. Kickstand Centres address
common barriers to care by integrating services across providers, offering extended hours, and
providing walk-in therapy sessions with no waiting list. Clients are not required to have a referral
or meet admission criteria.

In 2024-25, Kickstand Centres opened in Bonnyville, Fort Saskatchewan, Grande Prairie, and
Edmonton. Development of the Edmonton centre was made possible through philanthropic
funding. Collectively, Kickstand Centres in Bonnyville, Fort Saskatchewan, and Grande Prairie,
received more than 7,000 visits with more than 1,200 unique youth receiving services. Kickstand
Edmonton, which opened in February 2025, is seeing an average of 62 new service users per
month. Of respondents to the post-visit survey, 88 per cent reported agreement or strong
agreement that they felt better after participating in the program and 17 per cent indicated that if
they had not gone to a Kickstand Centre, they would not have accessed help.

Kickstand also operates a virtual service platform, Kickstand Connect, which offers no-cost,
confidential online access to appointments for mental health, substance use, peer support, and
employment services, as well as workshops and support groups. In 2024-25, Kickstand Connect
reported 816 completed appointments, with 83 per cent of these being for mental health or
addiction support services. This represents an increase of about 300 per cent in appointments



40                                                     Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



compared to the prior year. In 2024-25, the Department of Mental Health and Addiction provided
$3.6 million to continue to implement Kickstand Centres and support Kickstand Connect.

Over the coming year, Kickstand will focus on establishing Kickstand Centres in seven additional
communities across Alberta (Drayton Valley, Medicine Hat, Strathmore, the Tri-Region, Enoch Cree
Nation, Alexis Nakota Sioux First Nation, and Samson Cree Nation) with a goal of completing
implementation before March 2026. Kickstand is also exploring opportunities to expand Kickstand
Connect programming to include psychiatric and primary care services through complementary
health care professional teams.

In partnership with CASA Mental Health, the province is expanding the CASA House program
(https://casamentalhealth.org/getting-help-2/casa-house/) to three additional communities over
the next three years: Fort McMurray, Calgary, and Medicine Hat. CASA Houses offer referral-based
live-in and day treatment programming. The live-in CASA House program is available to youth in
grades 7 to 12 with complex mental illness and social challenges, often with concurrent addiction
or learning issues, who have not responded as expected to previous interventions. The program is
family-centred, with parents and caregivers actively participating in treatment while youth live at a
CASA House facility. Treatment includes individual, group, and family therapy, social and life-skills
training, and on-site schooling in small classrooms. The goal is to help young people closer to home
and reduce the need for hospital stays; the average length of stay in the live-in program is about
four months. The day program is available to youth in grades 8 to 12 who have a diagnosed mental
illness and struggle in a conventional school setting, allowing them to attend school at a CASA
House while receiving ongoing therapy.

In 2024-25, the department provided $29 million ($18 million in capital and $11 million in
operating funding) to support planning and construction of the three new CASA facilities, as well as
relocation of the existing CASA House from Sherwood Park to Edmonton. The existing CASA House
in Sherwood Park will continue operating until the new location opens. The intent is to co-locate
live-in and day treatment programs in the new and expanded facilities to allow for a seamless
continuum of care, where clients can transition to and from the two programs without disruption.

The new CASA Houses in Fort McMurray and Calgary are expected to open in 2027, while the
Medicine Hat and Edmonton facilities are expected to open in 2029. Once the three new facilities
are fully operational, CASA House programs will be able to serve more than 300 additional youth
with complex mental illnesses per year. In 2024-25, the existing CASA House program served more
than 20 youth with complex mental illnesses. In addition, CASA began delivering Trauma Program
services out of temporary spaces in Calgary in February 2025.

The Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction is continuing to fill a critical gap in mental health care
by providing support and services to help Albertans recover from complex eating disorders.
In 2024-25, the Department of Mental Health and Addiction and Recovery Alberta spent nearly
$3.3 million to support the establishment and operation of the EHN Sandstone Recovery Centre in
Calgary for youth and young adults aged 12 to 24 with complex eating disorders. The Silver Linings
Foundation also raised and contributed $4 million in capital funding for this 12-bed facility,
operated by EHN Canada, that provides intensive, specialized treatment at no-cost for up to
52 young people each year. By offering care in a community setting, the centre helps reduce the
need for prolonged hospital stays and improves health outcomes for patients. The centre delivers
an individualized approach to care with 24/7 support from a multidisciplinary team of physicians,
nurse practitioners, registered dietitians, nurses, counsellors, and support staff. Services include
weekly individual and family therapy, daily group therapy, nutritional rehabilitation, structured
meal support therapy, self-care and wellness activities, nutritional education, and distress
tolerance skills. The length of treatment varies based on individual needs, generally ranging from
three weeks to four months.


Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                41
Results Analysis



A total of $10 million is budgeted over three years (2023-24 to 2025-26) for this initiative. As of
March 31, 2025, 24 patients have been admitted to the facility with additional referrals being
triaged. Within the first year of opening, there have been significant enhancements in clinical care,
including the implementation of family programming and therapy groups. In addition, substantial
investments have been made in staffing, including hiring therapists, clinical supervisors, dietitians,
nursing staff, and physicians to meet the unique needs of the patient population. Collaborative
partnerships with community agencies have been established, and future plans include increasing
bed capacity and managing higher acuity patients, setting a strong foundation for long-term
success (see Key Objective 3.2 for additional information on eating disorder supports).

2.3   Develop a comprehensive continuum of culturally appropriate mental health and
      addiction services to support Indigenous people in Alberta.

Partnering with Indigenous communities to provide culturally safe addiction
treatment
As part of the ongoing effort to build the Alberta Recovery Model and remove barriers to
land-based, culturally safe services for Indigenous Peoples, Alberta’s government is establishing
five recovery communities in direct partnership with Indigenous communities across the province.
These facilities are being built on Indigenous lands with Enoch Cree Nation, Tsuut’ina Nation,
Siksika Nation, Blood Tribe, and the Métis Nation of Alberta. Included among the 11 new recovery
communities province-wide, these facilities will provide culturally relevant, community-based
services and holistic healing.

The Indigenous-led recovery communities are at various stages of planning and development. Once
operational, each recovery community will add about 75 long-term treatment beds to the system,
with each being capable of supporting up to 300 people per year in their pursuit of recovery.
In 2024-25, $72.5 million in capital funding was provided to support planning and construction of
these recovery communities, which is $26.5 million below the budget of $99 million. The lower
spending was due to reprofiling of capital grants for project delays in some Indigenous-led
recovery community builds.

In 2024-25, Siksika Nation worked with the province on planning and design and a groundbreaking
ceremony was held in June 2024. As of March 31, 2025, the recovery community was under
construction and is expected to be completed by fall 2025. In August 2024, Alberta's government
announced the Healing Waters Recovery Community in partnership with the Métis Nation of
Alberta. Together with the province, the Métis Nation of Alberta worked to plan and design a
facility that reflects and honours Métis culture. As of March 31, 2025, Healing Waters and the Enoch
Cree Nation the recovery community were under construction and are expected to be complete by
the end of 2025-2026.

Construction progressed on the recovery community at Blood Tribe and Nation-led community
engagement and site selection were completed for the Tsuut’ina Nation recovery community in
2024-25. The ministry provided capacity-building support to project teams from each community
starting in fall 2024 (see Key Objective 1.2 for additional details).

Supporting culturally relevant community-based programs and services
Mental Health and Addiction continues to fund a suite of programs and initiatives delivered by
Indigenous partners to ensure culturally relevant mental health and addiction supports are
available to First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples in Alberta across the continuum of care.
In 2024-25, the department provided more than $4.6 million to support distinct initiatives
pertaining to Indigenous ways of knowing and healing. These community-led investments aim to



42                                                      Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                         Results Analysis



deliver frontline mental health and addiction services closer to home and address service gaps
through culturally grounded, locally informed solutions. Key actions in 2024-25 included:

• Expanding community navigator capacity through initiatives like the Stoney Nakoda Tsuut'ina
   Tribal Council First Nation Client Liaisons and the Coordination for Integrated Mental Health
   and Addiction Programming project. These initiatives support trusted local navigators in
   connecting individuals to culturally relevant care and strengthening partnerships between
   Indigenous communities and the public health system.
• Helping individuals overcome barriers to accessing timely, culturally relevant care through
   supports such as Metis Settlements Mental Health and Addictions Navigators the Community
   Wellness Advocate Program. These programs provide navigation assistance, crisis financial
   support to help overcome waitlists, and facilitate connections to services. Population health
   surveillance, provided under the Community Wellness Advocate Program, helps inform
   planning and service delivery in alignment with local needs and priorities.
• Supporting life-skills and reintegration programs, such as Treaty 6 Wellbriety Movement and
   Mental Health and Addiction Supports Program that combine traditional healing with personal
   development to help individuals maintain sobriety, address trauma, and re-integrate into family,
   community, and work life.

Program highlights
The Building Bridges from Care to Home Program, delivered by the Kainai Transition Centre
Society (KTCS), provides support to individuals transitioning back to their families and
communities who are challenged by addiction, trauma and mental health issues. The program is
located on Blood Tribe land and provides 22 transitional beds where clients can stay for up to one
year to engage in Indigenous healing practices and counselling. In 2024-25, 280 individuals
accessed psychological services within the program, almost double the number of individuals over
the prior year. A total of 600 education sessions, 180 recovery support meetings, and 200 one-on-
one sessions with Elders were held throughout the year, all of which represent significant increases
compared to 2023-24. In addition, KTCS enhanced its programming to include more cultural
on-the-land activities, such as cultural camps, participating in the Sundance, and learning at various
spiritual/historical sites. They also collaborated with the Blood Tribe Department of Health to plan
the transition from a medical to a social model, set for execution in 2026.

Bringing the Spirit Home, delivered by the Blood Tribe Department of Health Inc., is an
Indigenous-led, voluntary program that is no cost to clients. It includes a voluntary medical
withdrawal management program and a post-detox/pre-treatment program.

The medical withdrawal management program offers 24 beds for stays of up to 14 days, providing
trauma-informed care and culturally appropriate, medically supported withdrawal management
services. Clients are connected by a case manager to wraparound supports such as professional
counselling, peer support, traditional healing, and ongoing medical care. In 2024-25,
459 individuals were admitted to the program, an increase of more than 19 per cent compared to
2023-24. This included 448 through self-admission, and 238 successfully completed detox and
stabilization in opioid replacement therapy.

The post-detox/pre-treatment program provides 20 spaces for individuals who are awaiting
treatment or recovery placements, helping to prevent relapse during this critical and transitional
phase. Clients stay for up to three months, participating in meaningful daily activities delivered by a
diverse team including persons with lived experience, recovery coaches, social workers, addictions
counsellors and Elders, strongly informed by Blackfoot culture. In 2024-25, 147 individuals were
admitted to the program: 13 were discharged to the community, 43 participated in Day Treatment
Programming, and 87 transferred to various recovery facilities.


Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                 43
Results Analysis



In response to the Jasper wildfire relief efforts, funding was provided to Little Red River Cree
Nation through the Honouring Life Program to support activities intended to:

• Bring community members together and provide cultural learning opportunities to help build
     their sense of community and connection.
• Support community members’ mental wellness during the evacuation period.
• Provide opportunities for Elders and youth to connect and find joy and strength in Cree
     language and culture.

All activities were led by Elders and Knowledge Keepers. The impact of these activities included
creating a sense of community and learning about the strength of Cree culture and teachings.
During stressful and difficult times, the activities allowed youth and community members to
connect with Elders and each other, and to share emotional difficulties while providing support to
others. The cultural workshops and activities provided an opportunity for community members to
spend time away from crowded evacuation centres and offered a distraction from the realities of
evacuation from their homes and community and feelings of isolation and hopelessness. Multiple
workshops and activities were offered in locations where members were evacuated.

Performance Indicator 2.a:
     Recovery-supportive community scores for selected Alberta communities (under
     development)

In 2024-25 the work on this performance measure was put on hold due to several limitations such
as costly methodology, lack of historical data for system linkages and trend analysis, and the risk of
unrepresentative samples. The ministry remains committed to exploring opportunities to measure
and understand community support for recovery.

Going forward, performance metrics for the community-focused outcome (Outcome 3 in the
2025-28 Mental Health and Addiction Business Plan) include:

• Mental health and addiction emergency department visits, which reflects the benefit of
     individual Albertans’ improved access to community-based mental health and addiction
     programs and services.
• Operational and newly created mental health and addiction facilities, which demonstrates the
     progress and success of targeted strategies to build mental health and addiction system capacity
     and improve the availability of supports and services for Albertans pursuing recovery.




44                                                      Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Results Analysis



Outcome Three: Albertans have access to high-quality, person-centred mental health
and addiction programs and services
The Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction works with government and community partners to
provide access to a comprehensive continuum of supports and services spanning prevention,
intervention, treatment, and recovery for Albertans at risk of, or experiencing, mental health and
addiction challenges. The Department of Mental Health and Addiction is responsible for directly
funding the delivery of a wide range of community-based programs and services that provide
mental health and addiction support for children and youth, adults, Albertans in rural and remote
areas, and other vulnerable and underserved communities. Many of these programs are delivered
by Recovery Alberta.

Key Objectives

3.1   Extend the My Recovery Plan platform roll out to support evidence-based decision
      making and help more Albertans living with addiction build their recovery capital and
      improve their ability to pursue and maintain recovery.

Assessing recovery outcomes
The My Recovery Plan (MRP) digital platform is enabling evidence-based, person-centred care by
helping individuals measure their recovery capital—the personal and community resources that
support recovery (see page nine for a full description of recovery capital, including the eight
domains). MRP is being implemented in all publicly funded bed-based addiction treatment services
and recovery communities in Alberta.

Building and sustaining recovery capital is essential to the Alberta Recovery Model. MRP helps
individuals assess, plan, monitor, and measure their own recovery capital as they follow a recovery
pathway unique to them. Recovery Alberta provides operational oversight of MRP in its operated
and contracted facilities, including protection of client information through strong privacy
management processes. As part of this oversight responsibility, Recovery Alberta frequently
engages with all sites that have implemented MRP to provide ongoing training and support as
needed. This ensures processes are being followed and accurate data is being captured.

MRP includes a recovery capital assessment that generates a Recovery Capital Index (RCI) score for
consenting clients at admission. Depending on the length of a program, assessments may be
conducted at several points during an individual’s stay to monitor changes in recovery capital and
inform care planning. Increases in recovery capital are associated with positive outcomes for
individuals experiencing addiction and speak to the strength, quality, and person-centred nature of
addiction programs and services for people pursuing recovery.

In 2024-25, the Department of Mental Health and Addiction spent almost $888,000 to implement
and operate the MRP platform across Alberta’s publicly funded bed-based treatment facilities and
operational recovery communities. As of March 31, 2025, MRP has been adopted in 39 bed-based
addiction treatment facilities, including all three operational recovery communities, all
10 Recovery Alberta-operated programs, and 26 of 33 Recovery Alberta-contracted service
providers. MRP has not yet been implemented in Indigenous-specific bed-based treatment
programs; engagement with Indigenous communities is ongoing to ensure the tool and its
implementation are culturally appropriate. Since launching in July 2022 through March 31, 2025,
more than 7,480 Albertans have enrolled in MRP. Of this total, almost 6,000 individuals had at least
one assessment of their recovery capital. In the coming year, the ministry will continue to expand
its efforts in recovery capital measurement, including embedding measurement and care planning
in more seamless and nuanced ways across services in the continuum of care.



Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                45
Results Analysis



In January 2025, all three operational recovery communities began using MRP. As of
March 31, 2025, a total of 164 recovery community clients had been enrolled in the MRP platform,
representing 36 per cent of all recovery community admissions in 2024-25. Of these clients,
96 per cent had completed at least one recovery capital assessment. MRP will be implemented in
new recovery communities as they open. Over the next year, clients will begin completing their
second assessments, allowing the ministry to calculate improvements in RCI scores among
recovery community clients and gain further insight into recovery community outcomes.

Most publicly funded bed-based addiction treatment service providers have been collecting
individual-level recovery capital data through MRP since late 2022-23, which has allowed
providers to monitor the effectiveness of their programs and meet reporting requirements more
easily. Anonymized aggregate data from MRP on treatment access, changes in recovery capital, and
system capacity is helping the department provide effective oversight to ensure Albertans receive
the supports they need for long-term recovery. As more MRP data is generated, it is expected to
help identify trends, recovery barriers, and service gaps, providing evidence to guide future policy
and funding decisions. Data on social supports, justice system involvement, and vocational and
housing needs will enable analysis of recovery barriers for specific client groups or service
locations. MRP data is also helping service providers support their clients by highlighting barriers
and deficits affecting each person’s recovery capital. Recovery Alberta is continuing to work with
operational leaders and providers to better understand the applicability and uses of MRP data.

3.2    Expand access to a range of virtual and in-person recovery-oriented supports to
       improve mental health and addiction care and support better outcomes for
       communities in need, including underserved, rural, and remote populations.

Supporting and delivering bed-based mental health and addiction care
Implementation of the Alberta Recovery Model is helping to remove barriers and ensure every
person has an opportunity to pursue recovery. Since 2019, Alberta’s government has worked to
establish a system of care that provides treatment and recovery options for Albertans when and
where they need it, including establishing more than 10,000 new publicly funded addiction
treatment spaces that are provided at no-cost to all Albertans.

 2024-25 Provincially Funded Bed-Based Addiction Treatment Client Statistics1 2

 •    36 per cent received intensive addiction treatment services.
 •    13 per cent received non-intensive addiction recovery services.
 •    79 per cent3 received medical withdrawal management services.
 •    63 per cent identified as male.
 •    37 per cent identified as female.
 •    The client average age is 38.
 1 Service totals do not add up to 100 per cent as some clients used more than one service.

 2 Excludes recovery communities.

 3 Excludes clients presenting under the influence of intoxicants who receive overnight shelter accommodation.



Recovery Alberta delivers 1,414 addiction treatment beds. Addiction beds are in community within
self-contained settings or separate units within a facility to provide treatment for clients with
substance use disorders and gambling problems. Treatment includes withdrawal management,
clinical care, assessment, counseling, treatment, and recovery. These beds are operated by
Recovery Alberta and contracted service providers. Data for addiction services in Alberta indicates
occupancy rates of between 85 and 90 per cent in 2024-25 for most of the addiction treatment


46                                                                    Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                          Results Analysis



services Recovery Alberta delivers. Ideal occupancy rates are near 90 per cent since this minimizes
unused capacity while also allowing for patient flow and flexibility in responding to patient need.
In 2024-25, more than 10,000 unique clients were served in addiction treatment beds.

Recovery Alberta’s 1,350 community mental health beds, transitional, and long-term services are
delivered to clients with varying degrees of mental health issues. This may include integrating safe
and stable housing with targeted addiction and/or mental health recovery-oriented services. It may
also involve supporting clients’ behavioural, social, physical, and medical needs along a continuum.
In 2024-25, more than 1,375 clients received support from Recovery Alberta in these settings.

Recovery Alberta delivers inpatient services through 742 beds within 17 active treatment hospitals
across the province. These nursing unit beds are designated for Albertans who need treatment for
general psychiatric or psychological disorders that cause moderate to severe impairment, or
require care related to psychoactive substance use. Inpatient psychiatry beds deliver assessment,
stabilization, and treatment of mental, psychiatric, and psychological disorders to patients who
require 24/7 psychiatrically supervised care in a safe and secure hospital location. From
April 1, 2024, to December 31, 2024, more than 12,300 unique clients were treated for an addiction
or mental health concern in acute care settings.

Alberta has 936 dedicated beds in five standalone psychiatric hospital facilities that deliver
services exclusively for psychiatric care and psychiatric supervision. These facilities provide
targeted designated psychiatric services across the addiction and mental health continuum,
primarily, but not limited to, bed-based inpatient care. All five sites offer inpatient, outpatient, and
day hospital care. Each site has a unique combination of services that work in alignment with other
local psychiatric resources. Recovery Alberta operates four of these psychiatric facilities (Southern
Alberta Forensic Psychiatric Centre, Claresholm Centre for Mental Health and Addictions,
Centennial Centre for Mental Health and Brain Injury, Alberta Hospital Edmonton), while Covenant
Health operates one location in Edmonton Zone (Villa Caritas). From April 1, 2024, to
December 31, 2024, the five facilities served 3,150 unique clients.

Change in Addiction and Mental Health Beds

                                     Total – March      Total – March
            Bed type                                                    Difference        % Change
                                       31, 2024           31, 2025

  Addiction (bed-based,
                                          1,354            1,414            60               4.4%
  other)

  Inpatient Care (acute,
                                          1,677            1,678             1               0.1%
  standalone)

  Community Mental Health                 1,386            1,350            -36              -2.7%
  (supported living)

  Total Addiction and Mental
                                          4,417            4,442            35               0.6%
  Health Beds


It is important to note that in addition to bed-based care, Recovery Alberta provides a variety of
supports through community-located treatment services for mental health, addiction, or
concurrent disorders. These include individual, group, and family services. A large range of clinical
and peer supports helps clients recover and maintain health in their community.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                  47
Results Analysis



In 2024-25, Recovery Alberta treated more than 151,000 unique clients through nearly 1.9 million
visits in community outpatient settings.

Providing accessible prevention and early intervention supports
The Government of Alberta works with community partners to ensure province-wide access for
those seeking help with mental health or addiction challenges early on. Whether Albertans reach
out by phone, online, or in person, they can quickly find help and be connected to care in their
communities. In 2024-25, the ministry partnered with several service providers to link people to
resources in their local community, including health and social services, to improve mental
well-being and outcomes regardless of where they live.

Access Services for Addiction & Mental Health are Recovery Alberta telephone-based resources
spanning the province that acts as the first access point for non-urgent mental health and addiction
information and services. Phone supports include navigation, screening, assessment, referral,
consultation, crisis intervention, outreach, and short-term stabilization. Callers requiring access to
a mental health or addiction service are screened, triaged, and provided with a first appointment
booking, or are provided with information on appropriate community resources. The program is
divided into three geographic areas covering (1) Edmonton zone, (2) Calgary zone and (3)
Northern, Central and Southern zones. In 2024-25, Access Services received nearly 135,000 calls.

211 Alberta (https://ab.211.ca/) is a free, confidential, 24/7 service that provides immediate
support and helps connect Albertans to the right resources or services based on their needs.
It offers a single point of contact for high-quality system navigation, connecting callers to
information and community supports such as health, social, government, and addiction and mental
health services. 211 Alberta is available by phone, text, or online chat, with phone service in more
than 170 languages.

211 Alberta is an initiative of the United Way Alberta Capital Region and is delivered in partnership
with the Canadian Mental Health Association Edmonton Region, and Distress Centre Calgary.
This collaboration combines expertise and resources to strengthen 211 Alberta’s ability to deliver
high-quality and sustainable services. Over the past year, 211 Alberta expanded specialized
navigation services to include more supports for individuals with complex needs and worked to
improve seamless access with partner organizations. (e.g., crisis lines, Alberta Support Contact
Centre/Income Support Contact Centre, Caregivers Alberta, Alberta One Line, and the Métis Nation
of Alberta). Collaborative relationships with services such as the 9-8-8 Suicide Crisis Helpline,
911 Calgary Police for call diversions, and REACH Edmonton for 24/7 Crisis Diversion further
enhance its ability to support individuals in distress or seeking mental health and social resources.

In 2024-25, the department provided more than $2.9 million for 211 Alberta to meet growing
demand, enhance community resource listings in rural areas, improve responses for underserved
populations, better connect callers to culturally appropriate local supports, and develop specialized
navigation services for children, youth, and families. 211 Alberta logged more than 117,000
interactions in 2024-25 (approximately 105,000 phone calls, 4,400 texts, 6,700 chats, and 1,250
other interactions), up 33 per cent from previous year. Of this total, more than 19,500 contacts
were related to mental health or substance use disorder needs, and almost 3,800 involved crisis
de-escalation. Notably, more than 1,400 contacts involved both crisis de-escalation and a mental
health or substance use-related concern. Beyond typical operations, 211 Alberta adapted its
services to meet the needs of those impacted by the Jasper wildfires, providing tailored support
and in-person assistance at the Jasper Re-Entry Welcome Centre.

Kids Help Phone (https://kidshelpphone.ca/) is a no-cost national mental health support service
accessible 24/7 by phone, text, or chat for children and youth ages four to 29. The service offers
mental health promotion and interventions, crisis support, anonymous and confidential


48                                                      Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                            Results Analysis



professional counselling, and community resource referrals in both English and French. It also
connects users to thousands of local resources through its online Resources Around Me portal.
In 2024-25, the Department of Mental Health and Addiction provided $2 million to support
continued operation of Kids Help Phone services for Albertans. Kids Help Phone handled almost
28,000 interactions from Alberta in 2024-25, including nearly 3,100 phone calls, more than
21,200 texts, and about 3,600 chats. The service also provided almost 5,100 referrals to services via
phone, text, and chat, and facilitated more than 7,500 connections to community resources through
the Resources Around Me portal.


 Mental health supports
 •    The Mental Health Helpline (1-877-303-2642) is a 24/7 confidential phone service that provides
      crisis intervention, support, information, and referrals for Albertans dealing with mental health
      challenges. The line is jointly operated with the Addiction Helpline (1-866-332-2322) and Alberta
      Health Link 811, and is staffed by an expert team of psychiatric nurses, psychologists, and
      referral specialists who ensure callers receive appropriate support and connection to services.
 •    The Alberta One-Line for Sexual Violence is 24/7 service (https://aasas.ca/get-support and
      1-866-403-8000) that provides emotional support, information and referrals to anyone
      province-wide who has experienced or been impacted by sexual violence.
 •    The Indigenous Support Line (1-844-944-4744) assists Indigenous people seeking service
      navigation assistance including cultural support; primary care support; addiction and mental
      health support; general Indigenous health care support; referrals; and/or patient concerns.
      Services are available Monday to Friday from 12 p.m. to 8 p.m.
 •    The 9-8-8 Suicide Crisis Helpline (https://988.ca/) provides emotional support and resource
      information for individuals dealing with thoughts of suicide or those who are worried about
      someone else. Services are available by phone or text 24/7.



Counselling Alberta (https://www.counsellingalberta.com/), a division of the Calgary Counselling
Centre, provides accessible, affordable, outcomes-driven counselling across the province with no
waitlist, through online and in-person services. Online counselling via video, phone, or chat is
available anywhere in Alberta, reducing barriers to access, especially for those in rural and remote
areas where in-person services may be limited or unavailable. In-person counselling, delivered in
partnership with local agencies, is offered in nine locations across Alberta: Calgary, Edmonton, Fort
McMurray, Red Deer, Lethbridge, Medicine Hat, Grande Prairie, Brooks, and Vegreville. Counselling
Alberta ensures consistent, high-quality support by providing clinical oversight, centralized intake,
outcomes measurement, and coaching for its partner agencies. In 2024-25, the program added
partner agencies in Edmonton, Brooks, and Vegreville, with plans underway to extend in-person
counselling to communities including Pincher Creek and Cypress County in the coming year.

In 2024-25, the department provided more than $6.5 million to support the continued operation
and expansion of Counselling Alberta’s online and in-person services. More than $19.7 million is
budgeted over three years (2024-25 to 2026-27) for this initiative. Counselling Alberta delivered
more than 21,000 counselling sessions to more than 4,200 unique clients in 2024-25, compared to
almost 12,300 sessions for more than 2,150 clients in 2023-24. This significant increase—almost
71 per cent in sessions and more than 95 per cent in unique clients—indicates a growing demand
for counselling services and reflects the expanded reach and accessibility of services. Reporting
from Counselling Alberta indicates that 98 per cent of clients who accessed services in 2024-25
experienced improvement, recovery, or stabilization in their mental health conditions.



Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                     49
Results Analysis



Helping Albertans sustain recovery
The Provincial Recovery College Program (https://alberta.cmha.ca/what-we-do/cmha-in-albertas-
projects/alberta-recovery-colleges) delivered by The Canadian Mental Health Association Alberta
Division and Centre for Suicide Prevention, provides free recovery-oriented mental health
education to support Albertans pursuing recovery. Recovery Colleges offer in-person and virtual
courses that help individuals with mental health or addiction challenges—and their supporters—
build peer support skills, resiliency, wellness, connection, and hope. All courses are co-developed
and co-facilitated with community members and peers to address local needs, blending lived
experience with clinical expertise. In 2024-25, the department provided $1.2 million to support
Recovery Colleges and help improve access to timely, cost-effective, outcomes-driven care.

As of March 31, 2025, seven Recovery Colleges funded under the Provincial Recovery College
Program were operational in Camrose, Grande Prairie, Lethbridge, Red Deer, Edmonton, Wood
Buffalo, and Medicine Hat. The newest location in Medicine Hat re-opened on March 4, 2025, in
partnership with Medicine Hat Family Services. A total of 1,339 courses were offered in 2024-25,
more than doubling the number of courses offered the previous year, including 36 new courses,
with a more than 10,700 course registrations. Almost 3,300 individuals participated in
recovery-focused courses, including more than 2,300 first-time participants, and more than
330 people were referred to Recovery Colleges from other services.

Recovery Colleges continue to meet Albertans’ needs and offer value to their communities.
According to a 2024-25 Recovery College participant survey, 90 per cent of respondents felt more
hopeful about the future after attending a recovery college course, 87 per cent reported increased
capacity to manage stress, and 85 per cent reported enhanced connection to an engaged
personal/social support network.

Recovery on Campus Alberta (https://www.recoveryoncampusalberta.ca) is a province-wide
initiative helping to establish peer-led recovery community programs on campuses at each of the
26 publicly funded post-secondary institutions to support students pursuing recovery from
addiction or mental health challenges. The goal is to provide virtual support to students in or
seeking recovery through addiction and recovery training, outreach, and community-building
activities (e.g., awareness campaigns), and recovery-safe events. The Department of Mental Health
and Addiction provided nearly $400,000 in 2024-25 to support the ongoing operations of this
initiative. A total of 483 capacity-building information sessions, workshops, and seminars were
held reaching more than 8,100 participants Alberta-wide. Program reports indicate 82 per cent of
the Recovery on Campus peer support participants found the programming helpful for their
recovery journey. As part of this initiative, the University of Calgary launched the UCalgary
Recovery Community (UCRC) Hub in early 2024—Alberta’s first dedicated peer-driven drop-in
space supporting all pathways to recovery, building community, and reducing addiction stigma on
campus. Collectively, Recovery on Campus and the UCRC Hub had more than 5,500 total
interactions (program attendees and drop-in visitors), hosted more than 375 events, and
welcomed 383 campus members to its peer support space in 2024-25.

Another initiative for post-secondary students delivered by Recovery Alberta ensures students in
Edmonton and southern Alberta have access to clinical mental health and addiction services as well
as seamless linkages into the public health system and back to campus. In 2024-25, Recovery
Alberta spent $1.7 million to support this initiative which served a total of 931 students. About
95 per cent of students who completed follow-up surveys reported satisfaction with the services
they received.

The Parents Empowering Parents (PEP) Society empowers families and caregivers of loved ones
struggling with substance use or addiction to step into health and recovery. PEP delivers a range of
free recovery-oriented services and educational supports for youth, families, and caregivers


50                                                     Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis



including a toll-free family support line, educational webinars and forums, virtual Family Recovery
Group meetings, and an in-person Family Recovery Group facilitated by professionals trained in
addictions, recovery, and trauma-informed care. Over the past year, a new program for youth aged
15 to 18 called URise was implemented to foster resilience and equip young people with skills for
holistic wellness. In 2024-25, the Department of Mental Health and Addiction provided $500,000 to
support ongoing operation of PEP programs and to add capacity and expand the in-person Family
Recovery Group to additional communities beginning with Red Deer as the first new community.
More than 880 clients interacted with PEP programs and services in 2024-25.

Connecting vulnerable people to mental health and addiction services and supports
Aligned with Alberta's recovery-oriented care approach, Navigation and Support Centres offer
coordinated, integrated services involving multiple provincial government ministries and
community partners to help ensure vulnerable Albertans have access to necessary supports.

Building on the successful Edmonton model, the Calgary Navigation and Support Centre opened in
July 2024, offering access in one convenient downtown location to critical health and social
services. The Department of Mental Health and Addiction provides funding to connect people to
essential resources they need to stabilize, including immediate opioid agonist treatment via the
VODP (see Key Objective 3.5 for additional details on the VODP). Recovery Alberta clinical staff
provide on-site mental health and addiction services, including screenings, brief interventions,
referrals, opioid use disorder treatment, and harm reduction education.

In 2024-25, on-site services expanded to include health system navigators and trained recovery
coaches to support recovery journeys. Since opening and through March 31, 2025, more than
10,000 people accessed a Navigation and Support Centre. Of this total, more than 4,000 people
were connected to mental health and addiction services, including more than 500 connections to
the VODP.

Recovery Alberta maintains data on individuals receiving mental health and addiction services at
the Navigation and Support Centres. This enhances patient continuity and service efficiencies,
ensuring clinical staff and recovery coaches at the centres have access to accurate and timely data
regarding treatment access and availability, including access to medical withdrawal management
services (see Key Objective 1.2 for more information on how the ministry is improving and
leveraging data).

The Department of Mental Health and Addiction continues to support people of all ages with eating
disorders in their recovery and wellness. The community-based Eating Disorder Support Network
of Alberta (EDSNA) provides information, guidance, a community hub, and virtual professionally
facilitated support groups for individuals and families affected by eating disorders. EDSNA’s
support groups are open to anyone in Alberta at low or no cost. In 2024-25, the department
provided more than $320,000 to EDSNA to facilitate these support groups and to deliver public
education and awareness activities about eating disorders. EDSNA offered 20 multi-week support
groups and 22 multi- and single session groups and workshops last year. More than 230 people
with eating disorders, caregivers, health care providers, and members of the public participated.

The Association of Alberta Sexual Assault Services (AASAS) provides leadership, coordination, and
collaboration on issues of sexual abuse and sexual assault, ensuring Albertans have access to
timely, affordable, and specialized sexual violence counselling services that are based on the most
recent research, information, and evidence-based practice. AASAS supports a network of
15 not-for-profit member agencies that provide specialized and distinct core sexual assault services
to individuals, families, and rural and urban communities across the province. AASAS also provides
oversight and therapeutic standards to these member agencies.



Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                 51
Results Analysis



In 2024-25, the Department of Mental Health and Addiction provided nearly $2.2 million to AASAS
to support the delivery of specialized trauma counselling services to those who have experienced
sexual violence through 12 of its 14 Sexual Assault Centres. Through these supports, 5,840 people
received counselling services, including 3,156 new clients. The AASAS delivered more than 34,300
individual and group counselling sessions throughout the year. Program reports demonstrated
84 per cent of group counselling participants gained awareness of available external supports and
resources. In 2024-25, an increase in diversity of clients accessing counselling services was also
noted, including more male identifying, Indigenous, transgender and 2SLGBTQIA+ clients. Over the
course of the year, AASAS facilitated 41 network-wide Community of Practice meetings to foster a
coordinated, collaborative, and evidence-based response to sexual violence.

The Domestic Abuse Response Team education program is delivered by Recovery Alberta and
focuses on building health care providers’ capacity across Alberta to effectively identify, screen and
refer individuals experiencing domestic violence through standardized, accessible training.
In 2024-25, the Department of Mental Health and Addiction provided $263,000 to support the
development of e-learning modules, aimed at improving awareness and screening for domestic
violence, family violence, and sexual violence among health care providers. Recovery Alberta is
continuing to expand the program’s training scope to include sexual violence, elder abuse, and
2SLGBTQIA+ clients, and offer training in more settings including corrections health, cancer clinics,
and primary care locations. Recovery Alberta expects to launch the modules in fall 2025.

The Department of Mental Health and Addiction provides support to The Canadian Mental Health
Association Alberta Division and Centre for Suicide Prevention to deliver the Actions Training and
Information Services for Albertans project. This project provides suicide prevention training and
workshops, including for Indigenous people, educational and research resources, engagement, and
coordination of stakeholders for provincial planning, and facilitation of community-based suicide
prevention plans including community campaigns. In 2024-25, the department provided $500,000
to support the project, which trained 637 individuals in suicide prevention. Engagement reached
53 addiction and recovery organizations across Alberta, the Buddy Up Campaign expanded with
new skills training and two new organizational champions, and evaluations showed significant
increases in participants’ confidence and ability to intervene with those at risk. Moreover, outreach
efforts expanded substantially, reaching over 5,500 subscribers through general information
mailouts with growing engagement across social media and community networks.

Based on data from the Centre for Suicide Prevention, Alberta saw a 50 per cent decline in suicide
rates among youth aged 15 to 19, a 30 per cent decline among those aged 20 to 24, and a
25 per cent decline among adults between 2022 and 2023.

            Decrease in Youth and Adult Suicide Rate in Alberta (2022 to 2023)

            120
            100
             80
             60
             40
             20
              0
                             15-19                          20-24                      Adults

                                                     2022      2023

            Source: Centre for Suicide Prevention: Alberta suicide stats by region and age (January 2025)



52                                                                  Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                         Results Analysis



Enhancing mental health resiliency

The Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction is working to ensure all communities within the
province have access to a continuum of mental health supports that build resiliency and meet their
unique needs. One way this is accomplished is through direct support to ethnocultural
community-based organizations to provide mental health and addiction supports and services
within their communities. The Department of Mental Health and Addiction is continuing to partner
with several organizations serving ethnocultural communities in Alberta’s urban areas, providing
more than $1.6 million in 2024-25 to help ensure program supports, such as counselling, education,
and skill building, are inclusive and reflective of the communities they serve. Programming
provided by these organizations supports both adult and youth populations. Key actions in
2024-25 included:
• Providing culturally appropriate mental health services and wraparound supports for
   immigrants and refugees facing multiple barriers to accessing traditional services, and
   educational sessions to organizations that work with these populations in Edmonton. More than
   800 people accessed these services with 80 per cent demonstrating a reduction in the severity
   of their clinical symptoms of mental illness and 90 per cent indicating they had learned new and
   effective coping strategies which they were incorporating in their daily lives.
• Delivering therapeutic and psycho-educational mental health and addiction programming for
   individuals aged 18 and over with concurrent disorders in Calgary’s South Asian community.
   A total of 783 people accessed services.
• Promoting and fostering of positive mental and physical well-being in immigrant and refugee
   youth ages 12-29 in Edmonton, helping youth increase their mental health awareness; build
   skills, knowledge, and confidence; explore career choices and pathways; and support personal
   development. A total of 540 people within 16 ethno-cultural communities accessed these
   supports and 455 counselling sessions were delivered.
• Providing specialized therapeutic services in Calgary for immigrant and refugee children and
   their families to build resiliency, including culturally sensitive mental health services focused on
   addressing traumatic stress and education for community stakeholders. A total of 55 people
   accessed services, with 70 per cent of participants demonstrating improvement in functioning
   and reduction in problem severity.

The Rural Mental Health Project (RMHP) is intended to address the mental health needs of rural
Albertans by building rural communities’ recovery capital and capacity to meet their residents’
mental health needs through training, community grants, and partnerships. The program is
delivered by The Canadian Mental Health Association Alberta Division and Centre for Suicide
Prevention with a goal to foster resiliency by empowering community members to become
changemakers in their own communities and leveraging whole-community, evidence-based, and
inclusive strategies to build healthy communities. Funding provided through the program supports
a sub-grant process, which allows for the development of needs-based action plans for rural
communities. In 2024-25, the Department of Mental Health and Addiction provided more than
$1.7 million to support the RMHP, which included funding 41 rural communities from across the
province through the sub-grant process, an increase of six communities compared to the prior year.
Over the course of the year, the Canadian Mental Health Association Alberta Division and Centre for
Suicide Prevention delivered 12 capacity building training sessions through the program, reflecting
ongoing commitment to empowering local projects and initiatives.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                 53
Results Analysis



3.3    Evaluate and expand access to mental health supports for youth in schools and in
       community to promote positive mental health, prevent severe mental health issues
       from developing, and provide treatment for students with mental illness.

Expanding access to mental health supports in schools
As part of the Alberta Recovery Model, the province is partnering with CASA Mental Health to
expand classroom-based services and the continuum of support for children and youth. CASA
Mental Health Classrooms (https://casamentalhealth.org/getting-help-2/casa-classrooms/)
provide a unique opportunity for students facing complex mental health challenges to receive
professional care closer to home without disrupting their education, allowing students to maintain
their social lives and stay connected to their peers. The goal of the expansion is to help address
psychiatric symptoms early, prevent hospitalization, and support every young person in their
pursuit of improved mental health in Alberta.

CASA Mental Health Classrooms are referral-based for students in grades 4 to 12 who:

• Have not responded as expected to previous therapy and continue to have symptoms that
     impact their home, social and school life.
• Are currently under the care of a physician, nurse practitioner, or psychiatrist.
• Are willing to participate in individual and group therapy with their family.

Students in mental health classrooms have access to a full-time teacher, mental health therapist,
mental health aide and other staff who support them in their recovery. Caregivers are also
provided with resources to support their child during and after the program. Students from
different schools within the community who require mental health supports can be admitted to a
mental health classroom. Programming aligns with the school year; students are supported in the
classroom for approximately half of the school year, followed by another half-year of tapered
treatment and caregiver support as students transition back to their home classroom and care
team. The program works closely with 211 Alberta to provide closed loop referrals (client needs
were met), connecting students and families to appropriate services available in the area.

The Department of Mental Health and Addiction is investing $66 million over three years
(2023-24 to 2025-26) to bring up to 60 mental health classrooms online that will serve a
catchment area of almost 140 communities Alberta-wide. In 2024-25, CASA Mental Health opened
12 new classrooms in nine communities, more than doubling the number of operational classrooms
over the previous year. As of March 31, 2025, there are 20 mental health classrooms in operation in
13 communities throughout the province. In 2024-25, more than 500 students received support
through a mental health classroom. More than 1,500 students are expected to be served each year
once all the mental health classrooms are established.

The Integrated School Support Program (ISSP) is a wellness initiative delivered by the Calgary
Police Youth Foundation that targets children and youth aged 5 to 15 at risk of addiction and
mental health challenges. The program provides prevention and early intervention wraparound
supports such as meal programs, after school care, structured physical education, a positive police
presence, and access to mental health professionals to help children and youth building strength
and resilience to improve their mental health, academic performance, social and emotional
wellness, and quality of life. The program works closely with 211 Alberta to provide closed loop
referrals, connecting students and families to appropriate services available in the area. The
Department of Mental Health and Addiction invested $8.5 million over two years (2023-24 and
2024-25) to expand the ISSP. In 2024-25, the program was funded in 11 additional high needs




54                                                     Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                        Results Analysis



schools throughout the province. As of March 31, 2025, there are 315 schools in 22 communities
across the province offering the ISSP and serving more than 10,000 young Albertans.

In its oversight function, the Department of Mental Health and Addiction continues to support
research and evidence-based programming through important work that provides insight into the
effectiveness of new mental health and behavioural supports and programs for children and youth
that are being implemented across Alberta.

Led by the Mathison Centre for Mental Health Research and Education at the University of Calgary,
the school-based mental health supports evaluation project (previously known as the Child and
Youth Health Services Initiative) is examining the community level impact of new investments in
mental health and behavioural supports in Alberta across four programs: CASA Mental Health
Classrooms, ISSP, Kickstand Centres, and 211 closed loop referrals. In 2024-25, the Department of
Mental Health and Addiction provided $1 million for qualitative data collection, completing
10 focus groups involving 72 mental health service providers and youth (aged 9 to 25) served by
Kickstand and CASA Mental Health Classrooms. Key performance indicators were developed to
assess whether youth mental health services are being delivered accessibly, safely, equitably, and
efficiently across diverse community backgrounds and abilities.

The Mathison Centre’s preliminary findings highlighted priorities such as improving mental health
service delivery and provision, addressing perceptions and attitudes about health care, and
investigating barriers to service access. In 2025-26, qualitative research will be conducted to
capture experiences from youth, service providers, and caregivers, alongside a literature review to
evaluate existing research on the types and suitability of youth mental health services in Alberta.
Findings will inform recommendations in the final evaluation report, which will be used to inform
decisions and enhance mental health supports and services for children and youth.

Supporting community-based programs and services for children and youth
CASA specialized services offer a suite of referral-based programs designed to promote, preserve
and restore the mental health of children and youth. These services support children and youth
aged 3 to 17 and their families through flexible service streams that provide access to timely,
high-quality mental health care. Families are matched with the appropriate level of service
depending on the complexity of mental health challenges. Services are community-based, and
therapy incorporates the child’s family, school, and community network in treatment.
CASA delivers five specialized programs through this stream of mental health services and early
intervention supports, leveraging multidisciplinary teams of mental health therapists, nurses,
therapy support navigators, and psychiatrists.

In 2024-25, the Department of Mental Health and Addiction provided more than $5.1 million to
support these services. A total of 539 individuals were referred to programs within this service
stream in 2024-25. The suite of specialized programs was accessed by 587 unique clients, 309 of
which were new. In 2024-25, the Family Therapy Program served 899 individuals (314 families
and 586 family members), up from 652 in 2023-24—an increase of 38 per cent. This surpasses the
expected increase in CASA’s reach (25 per cent) due to the program’s service expansion.

The Heroes Resiliency Program (https://www.impactsociety.com/heroes), delivered by Impact
Society for Children & Families in Turmoil, is a trauma informed social-emotional skill-building
program for children and youth aged 11 to 14 providing tools and mental health resources to build


5 The 2023-24 Mental Health and Addiction Annual Report identified a total of 18 schools as having implemented ISSP

as of March 31, 2024. Due to inconsistencies in defining the implementation period, the total presented was
incomplete. The issue has since been rectified and the revised total for 2023-24 is 20 schools.


Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                 55
Results Analysis



inner strengths, resilience, and decision-making skills for those at risk of or recovering from mental
health and addiction challenges. Facilitators such as teachers and counsellors are trained by the
Impact Society to deliver the program to students in schools and youth attending community
organizations. In 2024-25, the Department of Mental Health and Addiction provided almost
$500,000 to support program operations at 17 schools delivering the program in 13 communities.
More than 2,500 children and youth participated in the program in schools and the community
over the course of the year. A peer-reviewed longitudinal study published in March 2025 confirms
that Heroes significantly strengthens youth resilience, with students experiencing a 45 per cent
average increase in resilience scores that were sustained over five months post-program.

The Summit: Marian & Jim Sinneave Centre for Youth Resilience, operated by Recovery Alberta, is a
dedicated centre for child and adolescent (under 18 years of age) mental health services located in
Calgary. It provides no-cost therapy for children and families; services to manage acute, escalating
mental health symptoms; and day hospital services that provide intensive therapy in a community
setting. In 2024-25, Recovery Alberta spent $1.6 million provided by the Department of Mental
Health and Addiction to support Day Hospital program operations. More than 4,100 clients
accessed services—an increase of more than 16 per cent from the previous year. Follow up
appointments included services such as risk assessments and safety planning, social work, and
psychiatric consults, and additional family support such as peer support, spiritual care, and
                                                 consultations with a pharmacist or dietitian. The
  In partnership with Children and Family        average stay for intensive treatment was 13 days
  Services, the Department of Mental             and 2.4 per cent of all clients were directed to
  Health and Addiction provided                  hospital due to risk and possible admission. An
  $1.1 million to continue supporting eight      evaluation launched in 2024, using data from more
  Child Advocacy Centres for children            than 6,000 patients, is set for completion in June
  and youth up to 18 years of age who            2025 to inform future service improvements.
 have experienced sexual abuse or
 severe physical abuse or neglect and           The Youth Community Support Program (YCSP)
 are going through a legal process.             provides intensive, evidence-based, therapeutic
                                                mental health treatment services in the community
 The Trauma Treatment Services (TTS)            for youth and families as an alternative to acute or
 at Zebra Child Protection Centre offers        formal environments. Delivered by agencies in
 timely trauma care for children and            Calgary and Edmonton in partnership with
 families affected by severe abuse and          Recovery Alberta, services are offered in homes,
 builds community capacity to provide           schools, and in other community settings to reduce
 these services. In 2024-25, Recovery           barriers for families. In 2024-25, Recovery Alberta
 Alberta spent more than $336,000 to            spent more than $4.5 million to continue operation
 support the Centre, including therapy          of the program, which served 64 unique clients,
 and mental health navigation programs.         including 32 new clients, provided more than
 In 2024-25, TTS received 209 referrals,        7,600 individual and group counselling sessions,
 served 199 unique clients, and delivered       and discharged 31 clients. Discharge occurs when
 880 counselling sessions.                      treatment has been completed and youth are ready
                                                to step down from the program.

The referral-based Personalized Care in the Community (PCC) program serves high-risk children
and youth under 18 who are receiving child intervention services under the Child, Youth and Family
Enhancement Act. Often, these children and youth have experienced chronic incidences of trauma,
substance misuse, and mental health diagnoses, and have significant emotional and behavioural
challenges with impairments across several areas of development. The PCC is delivered by
Recovery Alberta in community-based settings in Calgary and Edmonton and offers
trauma-informed, integrated treatment through 24/7 on-site care, therapy, ongoing assessment,
occupational therapy, psychiatry services, and crisis intervention. In 2024-25, Recovery Alberta
spent almost $1.2 million to support two contracted partner agencies to deliver these services;


56                                                     Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                     Results Analysis



the Ministry of Children and Family Services provided additional funding to support other
components of the program. From April 1, 2024, to September 30, 2024, the program delivered
more than 2,600 sessions demonstrating impact by decreasing emergency department visits and
inpatient bed days.

The Mental Health Capacity Building (MHCB) initiative, led by Recovery Alberta, promotes positive
mental health in children, youth, and families in the communities where they live. Programs are
locally planned, coordinated and implemented; most programming serves rural and remote
communities. Supports include mental health promotion and prevention, skill-building, and
supports for students, families and school staff. As of March 31, 2025, MHCB reached nearly
700 schools in 266 communities across the province, benefitting nearly 200,000 students. In
2024-25, more than 62,600 skill-building sessions and 2,200 community activities were provided
to nearly 46,000 attendees. School staff conducted 4,300 sessions for more than 14,500 students,
and summer programming served more than 63,000 youth.

3.4    Support initiatives to decrease the number of opioid-related overdoses in the
       province.

Preventing overdoses
Alberta’s government recognizes the importance of providing a continuum of services, including
prevention, intervention, treatment, and recovery supports. Services that reduce harm are an
important part of this continuum when they are provided in a way that connects people with
recovery-oriented services and considers the safety of the community. By funding intervention
programs such as drug consumption services, the Provincial Naloxone Program, the Digital
Overdose Response System (DORS app), and Rapid Response Teams, Albertans can gain access to
other supports and connections to recovery-oriented services, including health care, social
services, treatment and recovery.

Naloxone is a drug that can temporarily reverse the effects of an opioid overdose. The Provincial
Naloxone Program, delivered by Alberta Health Services, is a province-wide initiative that aims to
reduce harm related to psychoactive substance use by distributing injectable naloxone kits through
community organizations and pharmacies at no cost to Albertans at risk of experiencing or
witnessing an overdose. Training is available wherever kits are provided. As of March 31, 2025,
there are 2,654 registered sites in Alberta communities where people can obtain an injectable
naloxone kit. Distribution sites include awareness resources for harm reduction programs, health
service providers and more. This program is an important part of the Alberta Recovery Model and
offers a critical pathway to supports including health care, social services, treatment, and recovery.

Since 2016, more than 1.3 million injectable naloxone kits have been distributed to people living in
Alberta. In 2024-25, more than $7.3 million was provided to supply free injectable naloxone to all
people living in Alberta for individual use and more than 300,100 kits were distributed through the
Community Based Naloxone Program. Self-reports indicate that naloxone provided through the
program reversed 7,555 overdoses in 2024-25 compared to almost 19,5006 in 2023-24. The
reduction in overdose reversals is consistent with the overall reduction in reported overdoses
between the two years. While the number of reported reversals is valuable, it is important to note
that the statistic is limited and likely underrepresents the true number of reversals because it is
self-reported.



6 This figure does not match what was presented in the 2023-24 Mental Health as more complete data on reversals was

made available following publication.


Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                 57
Results Analysis



Drug consumption services are facilities that offer hygienic spaces where individuals can use illicit
drugs in the presence of trained staff who are able to provide timely emergency care in the event of
an adverse drug reaction. These services help to reduce drug use in the community and may
connect people to health and social services. As part of a recovery-oriented system of care, these
sites can serve as a pathway to treatment and recovery; service providers offer referrals for clients
to a variety of recovery-oriented services such as medical withdrawal management, addiction
treatment and recovery services, social services, and primary or mental health care services.
Alberta’s drug consumption service providers also provide basic medical/wound care, harm
reduction education, supplies such as naloxone kits and sterile drug use equipment, and
connections to testing and treatment for infectious diseases such as HIV and Hepatitis C.

Throughout 2024-25, drug consumption service sites operated in Calgary, Lethbridge, Red Deer,
Edmonton (three sites), and Grande Prairie. On March 31, 2025, the drug consumption service in
Red Deer was closed permanently with new recovery-oriented and targeted services initiated to
help support the population previously served through the site. In 2024-25, Recovery Alberta spent
more than $17.8 million to support the operation of drug consumption services. The supports help
to manage adverse drug reactions and divert patients away from emergency departments and
reduce the burden on other emergency care including EMS. In 2024-25, drug consumption service
facilities were accessed more than 161,800 times with an average of nearly 1,800 unique
individuals using drug consumption services per month.

As part of their licensing requirements under the Mental Health Services Protection Regulation,
drug consumption service providers must publish good neighbour commitments that reflect their
promise to understand and respond to concerns raised by community members and specifically set
out a commitment to address any issues in the area surrounding the facility (e.g., discarded drug
consumption supplies).

Alberta’s government is continuing to support initiatives aimed at preventing drug overdoses and
reducing deaths due to addiction. In the immediate area around the Calgary Drop-in Centre’s
Riverfront Shelter and the Red Deer Safe Harbour Society’s Emergency Shelter, a rapid response
model is being employed to manage adverse drug reactions and divert clients away from other
urgent care services, like EMS and emergency departments. In both locations, Rapid Response
Teams of paramedics, nurses, and shelter staff respond to incidents of confirmed or suspected
overdose and initiate immediate clinical interventions to address medical emergencies quickly and
safely. Teams patrol areas around these shelter locations and monitor designated high observation
areas within the facilities where individuals at high risk of overdose are concentrated. In 2024-25,
the department provided more than $2.2 million to support Rapid Response Teams in both the
Calgary Drop-in Centre and the Safe Harbour Society emergency shelter.

In Calgary, the Rapid Response Team operates 24/7 and 2024-25 marked the first year of its
operations at full capacity. The services provided by the team continued to demonstrate a clear
diversion of clients from emergency care, with EMS responding to 20 per cent of the calls for drug
overdose events compare to response rates of 100 per cent before the team was installed.
Through March 31, 2025, the team:

• Responded to 807 drug overdoses at the Calgary Drop-in Centre.
• Connected 676 individuals to on-site medical supports, including medical withdrawal
     management.
• Connected 528 individuals to a navigator or recovery coach to access wraparound supports.
• Made 276 referrals to housing or other social services.




58                                                     Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                          Results Analysis



Diversion from emergency departments demonstrates success in addiction care since it indicates
that individuals experiencing addiction-related emergencies are receiving timely and targeted care
that is better suited to their specific needs, helping reduce unnecessary strain on EMS and hospital
resources. By investing in initiatives such as Rapid Response Teams, Alberta’s government aims not
only to provide immediate overdose intervention but also connect individuals promptly to
appropriate services like the Rapid Access Addiction Medicine clinic and the Acute Care Addiction
Recovery Program (see key Objective 3.5 for program details). The reduction in EMS and
emergency department use following the introduction of these teams was an anticipated outcome,
and affirms the effectiveness of targeted, integrated addiction interventions. This holistic approach
ensures efficient use of health care resources, improves recovery outcomes, and reflects prudent
investment of public dollars.

The Red Deer Rapid Response Team began operations in December 2024 for 12 hours per day,
seven days a week. Services were gradually scaled up through the first part of 2025, and as of
March 31, 2025, the team was operating 24 hours per day, seven days a week. This initiative is part
of a coordinated suite of mental health and addiction services for a target population in Red Deer
who are unhoused, may be using the homeless shelter or who are living in encampments, and are
struggling with addiction.

Rapid Response Teams also coordinate with on-site mental health, addiction, and primary care staff
to connect individuals to services, such as basic health care and medical withdrawal management,
as well as referrals and peer support to help clients access other recovery-oriented wraparound
supports within the continuum like mental health services, housing, and community-based
addiction treatment. In 2024-25, the Department of Mental Health and Addiction provided
$1.2 million to the Calgary Drop-in Centre to support individuals with complex needs who face
barriers to accessing housing and primary care in the community.

The Digital Overdose Response System (DORS) is a free mobile application (app) that can be used
to prevent overdosing and save lives. Through this confidential app, Albertans who use opioids or
other substances alone can summon emergency response to their location if they become
unconscious. The DORS app coordinates emergency responses based on information provided such
as person’s location, phone number and any unique access instructions. Information collected is
limited to what is required to support an individual in the event they require assistance. The app
has a built-in timer that provides an alert to check-in at various intervals to ensure safety; a session
can be cancelled or extended at any time. Individuals who do not respond to the timer receive a call
from the STARS emergency response centre. If STARS is unable to contact an individual or there is
reason to believe they may be experiencing an overdose, EMS is dispatched.

Beyond coordinating emergency responses, the app provides other information on national and
provincial addiction recovery supports and services, such as the Addiction Helpline, Virtual Opioid
Dependency Program, and opioid agonist treatment, ensuring people have the information they
need to move forward in their pursuit of recovery.

In 2024-25, the Department of Mental Health and Addiction provided $186,000 to support the
continued operation of DORS. As of March 31, 2025, the app had been installed almost 5,300 times,
with more than 3,100 registered DORS users. In 2024-25, a total of 429 new users registered for
the service in 2024-25, which is a decrease of 65 per cent compared to the number of new
registered users in 2023-24 (1,230 new users). A total of 700 sessions were initiated in 2024-25
compared to 1,673 in 2023-24, which represents a decrease of almost 58 per cent. There were
64 emergency response escalations to STARS compared to 87 the year prior and 11 emergency
response escalations to EMS compared to 19 the year prior, representing a decrease of nearly
26 per cent and nearly 42 per cent, respectively. This decrease may be attributed to reduction in
overall substance use but could also indicate a need for a new public awareness campaign.


Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                  59
Results Analysis



3.5   Support the delivery of addiction treatment services throughout Alberta to provide
      safe, variable supports for individuals to pursue recovery from addiction.

Providing accessible, low barrier addiction treatment
The Virtual Opioid Dependency Program (VODP) (https://vodp.ca), delivered by Recovery Alberta,
ensures accessibility to opioid use disorder treatment, offering same-day opioid agonist treatment
medication without a waitlist, and supports transition planning to local community providers and
recovery supports. Assessment and treatment are provided virtually, and when indicated,
prescriptions for opioid agonist treatment medications are sent to any qualified pharmacist in the
Albertan’s local area. In 2024-25, VODP piloted an increase of its hours of operation to 24/7 with
frontline clinical support staffed for 18 hours. Following a review of service use, in 2025-26, VODP
will return operations to 12 hours a day, seven days a week operation and focus on enhancing
services provided during peak service periods.

VODP is an innovative program with far-reaching and meaningful impact on the successful
advancement of the Alberta Recovery Model, such as diverting individuals away from emergency
departments or the correctional system and into a recovery-oriented system of care. VODP is
offered in a variety of settings to help people initiate or maintain on opioid agonist treatment,
including in police detainment units, corrections facilities, and Navigation and Support Centres
(see Key Objectives 1.4 and 3.2 for details of these programs). The recovery care pathway for many
persons accessing VODP includes the transition of care to a local primary care provider to maintain
treatment continuity in their home community. As part of the VODP, transitional services are
available seven days a week to help ensure smooth transitions for clients who are moving from one
care setting to another. The Transitional Service Team employs a significant social work
complement to provide expertise around resources for opioid care.

In 2024-25, Recovery Alberta spent $9.6 million to support the continued operation and expansion
of the VODP. As of March 31, 2025, the program had supported clients in more than 400 Alberta
communities.

2024-25 VODP Overview for Treated Clients

                               Indicator                                               Result

  Referrals to VODP                                                                     8,934

  Admissions                                                                            6,292

  Clients receiving same day access to opioid agonist treatment                         3,711

  Active clients                                                                        6,276

  Discharges                                                                            6,045

  Clients supported by VODP Transition Team                                             1,157

  Incoming calls to VODP                                                               34,923


The Youth VODP program is available to young Albertans with opioid use issues in community
group care, provincial campus-based care, and Protection of Children Abusing Drugs Act facilities.
The program has the capacity to serve up to 120 youth each year and is primarily focused on youth
who are involved with child intervention services. Children and Family Services supports delivery


60                                                       Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Results Analysis



of the program in partnership with Recovery Alberta and the Department of Mental Health and
Addiction. The program is a youth-directed and offers same-day opioid agonist treatment
medication without a waitlist. Youth can choose to access the program with their caseworkers,
provincial campus-based care, or community agency staff.

Through funding from the Partnership for Research and Innovation in the Health System program,
Recovery Alberta is working with First Nations and Métis communities across Alberta to expand
and evaluate tailored partnerships with the VODP, assessing the implementation, effectiveness, and
client and health care provider experience with the program. It is anticipated that participation in
this project will allow for the implementation of the program in a way that is aligned with each
community’s values and will increase access to services with improved health for community
members. Partnership building is ongoing and institutional agreements are in progress, aligning
with rolling Community recruitment and onboarding. Data collection in the first Community began
in April 2025.

The Virtual Rapid Access Addiction Medicine program (V-RAAM), operated by Recovery Alberta,
provides virtual addiction medicine physician consultations across Alberta for behavioural
addictions and non-opioid substance use disorders such as alcohol, stimulants, and gambling
disorders. The V-RAAM formally launched January 1, 2025, and as of March 31, 2025, there were
106 clients admitted to the program and three clients transitioned from VODP to V-RAAM. Overall,
there were 173 referrals to V-RAAM for treatment, and 535 incoming calls. The number of referrals
reflects that many clients accessing V-RAAM services are referred more than once prior to making
the commitment to engage in treatment. As of March 31, 2025, V-RAAM had supported 109 unique
active clients. Services will be sustained in 2025-26 by transitioning V-RAAM under the purview of
the VODP.

The Red Deer Mobile Rapid Access Addiction Medicine (M-RAAM) service, operated by Recovery
Alberta, launched in December 2024 in response to changing community needs. Located near the
Safe Harbour Shelter, M-RAAM offers low-barrier, walk-in addiction treatment for anyone in the
community, including unhoused individuals, or those using the shelter or living in encampments.
It provides immediate access to care for substance use and behavioural addictions and provides
on-site counselling, comprehensive screening, primary health care assessments, harm reduction
education and overdose prevention, referrals, and connections to community services.

M-RAAM integrates closely with Recovery Alberta broader service network—including virtual and
in-person addiction medicine services—to help ensure seamless and effective transitions across
treatment pathways. Since its inception, the program expanded from three hours/five days a week
to 12 hours/seven days a week (7AM to 7PM). In 2024-25, Recovery Alberta spent almost $200,000
to implement this program and more than $1.2 million is budgeted annually beginning in 2025-26
to sustain full operations.

The Calgary Rapid Access Addiction Medicine (RAAM) clinic supports the need for integrated and
comprehensive services by supporting seamless transitions through case management and
referrals to needed services. The clinic provides a ‘one stop shop’ for addiction treatment and
assessment for a variety of substance use disorders, behavioural addictions, and concurrently
diagnosed mental health issues that are typically subdivided into separate clinics or specialty
programs or providers.

The Acute Care Addiction Recovery Program (ACARP), delivered by Recovery Alberta, is a
comprehensive and coordinated approach to address a critical gap in access to addiction medicine
physician consultation and on-site health care professionals for the treatment of addictive
disorders within acute care settings. Throughout 2024-25, services were operational within the
Royal Alexandra Hospital (RAH) in Edmonton and Peter Lougheed Centre (PLC) in Calgary.


Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                              61
Results Analysis



ACARP provides rapid access to recovery pathways for acute care patients at risk of substance
related harms, including death by opioid overdose. ACARP increases initiation into treatment and
provides additional resources to emergency departments, where there are high volumes of
individuals presenting with addiction related concerns. Services include:

• Immediate initiation of evidence informed pharmacotherapy (e.g., opioid agonist treatment) for
     treatment of addiction disorders, including alcohol, opioids, nicotine, and stimulants.
• Comprehensive, evidence-based addiction management, including treatment recommendations
     for complicated intoxication and withdrawal.
• Resources to prevent opioid overdose and harm reduction education.
• Psychosocial supports, such as identification and referral for associated mental health
     conditions, and social supports.
• Referral to addiction treatment services and wraparound supports.

In 2024-25, Recovery Alberta spent almost $5 million to sustain ACARP services at the PLC, RAH,
and the Calgary RAAM clinic. ACARP at the PLC and RAH completed a combined 3,307
consultations, served a total of 2,531 unique patients, and supported 1,881 patient referrals to
outpatient services in 2024-25, while the Calgary RAAM clinic had 15,551 client visits and served
almost 2,800 unique clients. Over the coming year, ACARP services are expected to be expanded to
the Foothills Medical Centre, the Rockyview General Hospital, and the University of Alberta
Hospital. Service expansion will be achieved through staff redistribution to the new sites with the
annual operational cost being unchanged.

Alberta continues moving forward with the Alberta Recovery Model in response to the addiction
crisis, including providing accessible, low-barrier, person-centred treatment options for Albertans
seeking recovery from opioid use issues. Opioid Dependency Program (ODP) clinics assist people
living with opioid use disorder by providing evidence-informed opioid agonist treatment
medications such as methadone, buprenorphine/naloxone, buprenorphine extended release, and
slow-release oral morphine, and offer allied health services including psychosocial support,
addiction counselling, and referrals to other community-based services. In 2024-25, Recovery
Alberta spent almost $15.5 million to support ODP clinics which provided care to 12,017 unique
clients throughout the year. As of March 31, 2025, Recovery Alberta-operated ODP clinics were
operating across the province in Bonnyville, Calgary, Cardston, Edmonton (five sites),
Fort McMurray, Grande Prairie, High Prairie, Lethbridge, Medicine Hat, Red Deer, and the Virtual
Opioid Dependency Program (VODP).

Evidence-informed pharmacotherapy (e.g., opioid agonist treatment medication) is a key factor in
successfully supporting recovery pathways. Addiction is a chronic yet treatable medical condition.
Just like diabetes where an individual will require ongoing medication, some individuals living with
opioid use disorder may require opioid agonist treatment medication indefinitely.

Narcotic Transition Services (NTS) are highly specialized, evidence-informed addiction treatment
services intended for people with severe, treatment-resistant opioid use disorder (e.g., severe
fentanyl dependency/withdrawal) who have been unable to stabilize on conventional opioid
agonist treatment medications. NTS is available major centres across Alberta, helping to first
stabilize patients with designated narcotic drugs, such as hydromorphone, up to three times per
day and then transition them to evidenced-informed opioid agonist treatment medication options
under expert medical care and comprehensive psychosocial supports. As of March 31, 2025, NTS is
available in ODP clinics in Calgary, Edmonton, Red Deer, Lethbridge, Grande Prairie, and
Medicine Hat. In 2024-25, there were 178 active clients in the NTS program and more than
35,700 total visits from NTS clients.


62                                                       Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                         Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 3.a:
     Change in recovery capital scores of Albertans accessing publicly funded treatment
     (per cent)

                                                                 Prior Years’ Results
  Recovery Capital Tool
                                     2020-21          2021-22           2022-23           2023-24           2024-25

  Recovery Capital Index                N/A              N/A               N/A              43%               36%
  (RCI)

  Assessment of
  Recovery Capital                      N/A              N/A               N/A              43%               38%
  (ARC)

Source: MRP System
Notes: The MRP system rollout began in July 2022, and as such, there are no historical full fiscal year results to report
prior to 2023-24. Results reported for 2022-23 in the 2024-27 Mental Health and Addiction Business Plan included data
from July 2022 to December 2023. The result has been recalculated to align with fiscal year presentation.

Description: This indicator reports on the per cent change in individual recovery capital scores
from admission to discharge or most recent assessment of Albertans receiving addiction treatment
services in publicly funded facilities where the MRP platform has been implemented. The RCI and
ARC scores are calculated using items from the Recovery Capital (REC-CAP) questionnaire, which is
facilitated by a health care professional. The REC-CAP questionnaire includes 120 questions on
areas such as substance use, housing, legal issues, social supports and service needs, which touch
all domains of recovery capital. The ARC scale is a subset of 50 items from the REC-CAP
questionnaire representing social and personal recovery capital.

Rationale: Increases in recovery capital are associated with positive recovery outcomes for
individuals experiencing addiction issues. Recovery from addiction is among the most important,
ultimate goals of treatment for providers, family, clients and society. Improvements in this
indicator are intended to reflect improvements in quality and person-centred focus of addiction
programs and services.

Results and variance explanation: As of March 31, 2025, MRP had been implemented in
39 medical withdrawal management, residential addiction treatment and recovery sites in Alberta.
In 2024-25, 1,933 clients had eligible records, meaning at least two recorded assessments.
For those individuals, the mean percentage change in RCI from admission to discharge or most
recent assessment was 36 per cent. Although the RCI for 2024-25 is seven percentage points lower
compared to 2023-24, the number of individuals included in the analysis in 2024-25 is close to
three times the number for last year and this variance was anticipated. The change of 36 per cent in
the RCI is an indication of improvement of recovery capital with treatment in the community. The
ministry will continue to work with Recovery Alberta to identify opportunities to improve the
recovery capital questionnaire or develop a shorter assessment tool for use in low barrier services
(e.g., with clients accessing withdrawal management services).




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                   63
Results Analysis




Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology
Performance Measure 1.a
     Mental health and addiction-related emergency department visits with no interaction
     with publicly funded mental health and addiction services in the previous two fiscal
     years (per cent)

 Methodology

The information needed to generate this performance measure is hosted (including cleaning and
maintenance) in the Business Intelligence Environment in the Ministry of Health. The Strategic
Information, Research and Evaluation Unit in the Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction accesses,
extracts and analyzes the needed data to produce the results for this measure. All data extractions
and analyses are done using the Statistical Analysis Software data analytics tool. The result for this
measure is generated by following these steps:

• Datasets are derived by processing and merging the physician claims data, emergency
     department visit data, hospitalization data, Pharmaceutical Information Network data for
     mental health or addiction-related prescription drug dispensation, and population registry data
     for each fiscal year. This process allows for identification of the unique patients who have “used”
     and “not used” any publicly funded mental health and addiction services.
• The numerator for the respective fiscal year is determined by the number of individuals
     presenting in the emergency department for mental health or addiction-related concerns who
     have not used any mental health and addiction-related services in the last two years.
• The denominator is derived by summing the numbers of individuals presenting in the
     emergency department for mental health or addiction-related concerns who have “used” and
     “not used” the mental health and addiction related services in last two years.
• The result is obtained using the following formula:
                   Number of individuals presenting to an emergency department for
              addiction or mental health concerns who did not use publicly funded mental
                health and addiction services in the past two years of the reference year
 Percentage =                                                                             × 100
                  Number of individudals presenting to an emergency department for
                       addiction and mental health concerns in a given fiscal year

 Source

Alberta Health Business Intelligence Environment: National Ambulatory Care Reporting System;
Discharge Abstract Database; Practitioners Claim Database under Alberta Health Care Insurance
Plan; Pharmaceutical Information Network; Population Registry Files; and Alberta Health Postal
Code Translator File.




64                                                       Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 1.b:
     Albertans receiving care at an appropriate level (under development)

This indicator remained under development in 2024-25 and has been replaced in future Mental
Health and Addiction business plans.

Data for the preliminary results is extracted from the following sources:

• Consolidated Addiction and Mental Health Database, Alberta Health Services; and
• Discharge Abstract Data Alberta Hospital Discharge Abstract Database (DAD), Alberta Health.
Data updates may occur in the administrative sources referenced for the preliminary results; as
such, results are subject to change.




Performance Indicator 2.a:
     Recovery-supportive community scores for selected Alberta communities (under
     development)

This indicator was not developed in 2024-25 and has been replaced in future Mental Health and
Addiction business plans.




Performance Indicator 3.a:
     Change in recovery capital scores of Albertans accessing publicly funded treatment
     (per cent)

 Methodology

The raw data needed to generate this performance indicator is provided to Alberta Health Services
weekly from Last Door Recovery Society – the vendor supplying the MRP system.
The data is hosted in an Alberta Health Services data warehouse and Alberta Health Services
conducts the required analysis for this indicator.

MRP records are initiated for consenting clients at the time of admission into a publicly funded
facility that has implemented MRP. Data is entered into the REC-CAP tool via clinical interviews by
health care professionals in residential addiction treatment facilities, recovery communities and
medical withdrawal management settings. Some self-entry by clients is also available.
The REC-CAP questionnaire includes 120 questions on areas such as substance use, housing, legal
issues, social supports and service needs, which touch all domains of recovery capital (see page 10
for a complete listing of the domains). This assessment includes both positive recovery capital
items that support recovery and negative recovery capital items that do not support recovery.
The ARC scale is a subset of 50 items from the broader REC-CAP questionnaire representing social
and personal recovery capital.

All records for clients with at least two assessments are included:

• first assessment – usually upon admission; and
• most recent assessment – usually upon discharge.


Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                              65
Results Analysis



ARC scale values are summed for each record and the average is taken across records. Box plots are
produced for distributions of scores for each assessment to ensure they are suitable for the
intended analyses. Means for each assessment are produced and mean per cent change is
calculated along with paired t-tests and 95 per cent confidence intervals for statistical significance.

The ARC numerator is determined by subtracting the mean score for the first assessment (MT1)
from the mean score for the most recent assessment (MT2) for the 50 items included in the scale.
The ARC denominator is the mean score for the first assessment (MT1). The mean percentage
change is calculated using the following formula, where M is the mean, T1 is the first assessment,
and T2 is the most recent assessment:


                      MT2 − MT1
Percentage Change =             × 100
                        MT1
Values for the remaining items from the REC-CAP questionnaire are combined with the ARC items
to produce the RCI. The numerator is determined by subtracting the overall RCI score for first
assessment (MT1+100) from the overall RCI score for the most recent assessment (MT2+100).
The RCI denominator is the overall RCI score for the first assessment (MT1+100). The scales are
normalized, and the percentage change is calculated using the following formula, where M is the
mean, T1 is the first assessment, and T2 is the most recent assessment:


                      ((MT2 + 100) − (MT1 + 100))
Percentage Change =                               × 100
                              MT1 + 100
Data from medical withdrawal management settings are excluded. Clients are often unwell and in
distress and unable to complete the assessment at intake. In addition, stays in medical withdrawal
management settings are often brief with not enough time to significantly impact recovery capital.

 Source

Last Door Recovery Society, My Recovery Plan system database




66                                                      Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                                               Financial Information




Financial Information

Table of Contents
    Reporting Entity and Method Consolidation...................................................................................... 68
    Ministry Financial Highlights.................................................................................................................... 69
          Statement of Revenues and Expenses (unaudited) ................................................................. 69
          Revenue and Expense Highlights .................................................................................................... 70
          Expenses – Directly Incurred Detailed by Object (unaudited) ........................................... 74
    Financial Statements of Other Reporting Entities ........................................................................... 76
          Recovery Alberta.................................................................................................................................... 77
          Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence ...................................................................................109
    Financial Information ................................................................................................................................128
          Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited) ................................................................................................129
          Deferred Contributions (unaudited) ...........................................................................................130




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                               67
Financial Information




Reporting Entity and Method Consolidation
The consolidated ministry financial information is prepared in accordance with government’s
stated accounting policies, which are based on Canadian Public Sector Accounting Standards.

The reporting entity is the Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction for which the Minister of Mental
Health and Addiction is accountable. The accounts of the Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction,
which includes the Department of Mental Health and Addiction, Recovery Alberta (RA), and the
Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence (CoRE), are consolidated using the line-by-line method.
The audited financial statements of RA and CoRE are included in the annual report. RA's financial
statements have been restated to reflect a full year of operations, as required by the public sector
accounting standards.

Under the line-by-line method, accounting policies of the consolidated entities are adjusted to
conform to those of the government and the results of each line item in their financial statements
(revenue, expense, assets, and liabilities) are included in government’s results. Revenue and
expense, capital, investing and financing transactions, and related asset and liability balances
between the consolidated entities have been eliminated.

A list of the individual entities making up the ministry are shown on the “Management’s
Responsibility for Reporting” statement included in this annual report.




68                                                     Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                        Financial Information




Ministry Financial Highlights
Statement of Revenues and Expenses (unaudited)
Year ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)


                                                             2025                     2024               Change from


                                                   Budget                             Actual                          2024
                                                  Restated          Actual           Restated         Budget          Actual



Revenues
  Government Transfers
     Government of Canada                     $     168,992     $    154,522     $     116,869    $ (14,470) $         37,653
  Premiums, Fees and Licences                         5,977            3,878             5,805          (2,099)         (1,927)
  Investment Income                                     -              9,089            10,612          9,089           (1,523)
  Other Revenue                                      21,868           37,253            31,284         15,385            5,969
  Ministry Total                                    196,837          204,742           164,570          7,905          40,172
  Inter-Ministry Consolidation Adjustments          (11,815)          (12,348)         (15,900)          (533)           3,552
Adjusted Ministry Total                             185,022          192,394           148,670          7,372          43,724


Expenses - Directly Incurred
  Ministry Support Services                          13,453           13,592             6,435            139            7,157
  Mental Health and Addiction                       305,878          221,866           192,184         (84,012)        29,682
  Recovery Alberta                                1,393,500         1,492,151        1,398,372         98,651          93,779
  Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence              4,300             2,217              -           (2,083)          2,217
  Ministry Total                                  1,717,131         1,729,826        1,596,991         12,695         132,835
  Inter-Ministry Consolidation Adjustments          (17,521)          (24,285)         (33,541)         (6,764)          9,256
Adjusted Ministry Total                           1,699,610         1,705,541        1,563,450          5,931         142,091


Adjusted Annual Deficit                       $ (1,514,588) $ (1,513,147) $ (1,414,780)           $     1,441     $    (98,367)




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                          69
Financial Information



Revenue and Expense Highlights
Consolidated Revenues (Prior to Inter-Ministry Consolidation)

                          Other Revenue,
                             $37,253
                                18%




     Investment Income,
           $9,089
            4%




     Premiums, Fees
      and Licences,
         $3,878
           2%




                                                                              Government of
                                                                                Canada,
                                                                                $154,522
                                                                                  76%



Total actual revenue for the year was $204.7 million, which was $7.9 million higher than budget
and an increase of $40.1 million over the prior year.

Total revenue was $7.9 million higher than budget, mainly due to:

• Reallocation of other income from Alberta Health to the ministry for the restatement of
     Recovery Alberta ($10.0 million).
• Higher interest and dividend income in Recovery Alberta from stronger market performance
     than budget ($9.0 million).
• Refunds of expenditures not budgeted ($1.2 million), higher donations and contributions
     ($1.7 million), and higher external recoveries from the Workers' Compensation Board (WCB)
     and other miscellaneous revenue ($2.4 million).

This was partially offset by:

• Lower federal government transfers due to the timing of revenue recognition for bilateral
     projects, primarily delays in Recovery Community builds ($14.4 million).
• Lower out-of-province billings in Recovery Alberta compared to budget ($2.0 million).




70                                                      Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                 Financial Information



The $40.1 million increase from the prior year was primarily due to:

• $37.6 million funding increase provided through the Canada Health Transfer agreement.
• $10.0 million reallocation of other income from Alberta Health to the ministry for the
   restatement of Recovery Alberta.

This was partially offset by:

• $3.5 million decrease in interest income and health fees and charges.
• $2.7 million decrease in unused restricted grant funding returned from grant recipients.
• $1.0 million decrease in funding received from other Government of Alberta entities.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                              71
Financial Information



Consolidated Expenses (Prior to Inter-Ministry Consolidation)


                         Canadian Centre of                          Ministry Support
                        Recovery Excellence,                            Services,
                              $2,217                                     $13,592
                                0%                                          1%


                                                                                        Mental Health and
                                                                                           Addiction,
                                                                                            $221,866
                                                                                              13%




          Recovery Alberta,
            $1,492,151
               86%




Total actual expense for the year was $1,729.8 million, which was $12.7 million higher than budget
and an increase of $132.8 million from the prior year.

Total expense was $12.7 million higher than budget, mainly due to:

• $98.6 million increase in Recovery Alberta due to collective bargaining, increased demand for
     services driven by population growth, increased resources at correctional facilities, and general
     inflation.

This was partially offset by:

• Reprofiling of capital grants for project delays in Indigenous-led Recovery Community builds
     and deferral of CASA House payments ($44 million).
• Reallocations of grant funding to reflect the changing needs in the community, through grant
     recipient prior year surpluses and uncommitted grant funding ($40 million).
• Delays in staffing and project initiation at the Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence
     ($2.0 million).

The $132.8 million increase from prior year was primarily due to:

• $58.7 million in Community Care, related to the impact of collective bargaining increases,
     expansion of crisis teams in partnership with the Calgary and Edmonton Police service, and
     increased capacity for opioid use recovery and eating disorder treatment programs.



72                                                       Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                    Financial Information



• $22.0 million in Acute Care, due to collective bargaining impacts and higher patient acuity costs,
   particularly from Constant Care usage.
• $13.3 million in Diagnostic and Therapeutic Services and Administration, also related to
   collective bargaining increases.
• $36.7 million related to additional staff hires and increased capital funding within the
   Department.
• $2.2 million related to the operations of the Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence, which was
   established in June 2024.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                 73
Financial Information



Expenses – Directly Incurred Detailed by Object (unaudited)


                                                                             2025                        2024
                                                                 Budget                                 Actual
                                                                                    Actual
                                                                Restated                               Restated
Expense by object                                                               In thousands
  Salaries, Wages, and Employee Benefits                    $     861,624      $      961,651        $ 1,031,732
  Supplies and Services                                            548,363     $      545,100            371,574
  Grants                                                           290,678            205,617            177,647
  Consumption of Inventories of Supplies                            16,404     $       16,099             13,989
  Amortization                                                           -     $        1,359              1,549
  Other(1)                                                             62                      -               500
Total ministry expenses                                    $ 1,717,131         $     1,729,826      $ 1,596,991
  Inter-Ministry Consolidation Adjustments                     (17,521)                (24,285)         (33,541)
Ajusted total ministry expenses                            $ 1,699,610         $     1,705,541      $ 1,563,450


(1) Includes financial transactions and other expenses of $nil in 2024-25 ($500 in 2023-24).




2025 Actual (unaudited)

                              Consumption of
                          Inventories of Supplies,                 Amortization,
                                 $16,099                             $1,359
                                    1%                                 0%


             Grants,
            $205,617
              12%




                                                                                             Salaries, Wages and
                                                                                             Employee Benefits,
  Supplies and Services                                                                            $961,651
      and Other*,                                                                                    56%
        $545,100
          32%




74                                                          Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                  Financial Information



The ministry’s expenses were primarily for salaries, wages and employee benefits, supplies and
services, and grants, which together accounted for 99 per cent of total expenses.

• Salaries, wages and employee benefits were $961.6 million or 56 per cent of total expenses,
   supporting delivery of mental health and addiction services across the province.
• Supplies and services were $545.1 million or 32 per cent of total expenses, mainly attributed to
   contracts with health service providers and various purchased supplies and services.
• Grants were $205.6 million or 12 per cent of total expenses, primarily supporting Treatment and
   Recovery, Initiatives that Reduce Harm, and Children and Youth programs. Other grant expenses
   included restricted funding to support organizations and communities through various
   programs or initiatives.
• Consumption of inventory ($16.0 million) and amortization of tangible capital assets
   ($1.3 million) comprised the balance of the ministry’s total expenses.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                               75
Financial Information




Financial Statements of Other Reporting Entities


Table of Contents
Index of Audited Financial Statements
         Recovery Alberta.................................................................................................................................... 77
         Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence ...................................................................................109




76                                                                                           Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                                        Financial Information




Recovery Alberta
Financial Statements


Table of Contents

         Management’s Responsibility for Financial Reporting .......................................................... 78

         Independent Auditor’s Report ......................................................................................................... 79

         Statement of Operations ..................................................................................................................... 82

         Statement of Financial Position ....................................................................................................... 83

         Statement of Change in Net Financial Assets ............................................................................. 84

         Statement of Cash Flows ..................................................................................................................... 85

         Notes to the Financial Statements .................................................................................................. 86

         Schedule 1: Expenses – Detailed by Object ...............................................................................104

         Schedule 2: Remuneration and Benefits ....................................................................................105

         Schedule 2A – Board Remuneration ............................................................................................105

         Schedule 2B – Executive Remuneration and Benefits ..........................................................105

         Schedule 2C – Executive Supplemental Pension Plan ..........................................................106

         Footnotes to the Schedules of Remuneration and Benefits ...............................................107

         Schedule 3: Segment Disclosures ..................................................................................................108




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                       77
Financial Information




Management’s Responsibility for Financial Reporting
The accompanying financial statements for the nine months ended March 31, 2025 are the
responsibility of management and have been reviewed and approved by senior management.
The financial statements were prepared in accordance with Canadian Public Sector Accounting
Standards and include certain disclosures required by the financial directives issued by the
Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction, and of necessity include some amounts based on estimates
and judgement.

To discharge its responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of financial reporting, management
maintains systems of financial management and internal control, which give consideration to costs,
benefits and risks that are designed to:

• provide reasonable assurance that transactions are properly authorized, executed in accordance
     with prescribed legislation and regulations, and properly recorded so as to maintain
     accountability of public funds;
• safeguard the assets of the “Province of Alberta” that are the responsibility of Recovery Alberta.

Recovery Alberta carries out its responsibility for the financial statements through the Board. The
Board meets with management and the Auditor General of Alberta to review financial matters, and
approves the financial statements upon finalization of the audit. The Auditor General of Alberta has
free access to the Board.

The Auditor General of Alberta provides an independent audit of the financial statements. His
examination is conducted in accordance with Canadian Generally Accepted Auditing Standards and
includes tests and procedures which allow him to report on the fairness of the financial statements
prepared by management.




 [Original signed by Kerry Bales]                   [Original signed by Jennifer Ocloo]
 Kerry Bales                                        Jennifer Ocloo
 Chief Executive Officer                            Lead, Finance
 Recovery Alberta                                   Recovery Alberta




June 3, 2025




78                                                      Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                     Financial Information




Independent Auditor’s Report

To the Chief Executive Officer and Board Chair of Recovery Alberta


Report on the Financial Statements

Opinion
I have audited the financial statements of Recovery Alberta, which comprise the statement of
financial position as at March 31, 2025, and the statements of operations, change in net financial
assets, and cash flows for the nine-months then ended, and notes to the financial statements,
including a summary of significant accounting policies.

In my opinion, the accompanying financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of Recovery Alberta as at March 31, 2025, and the results of its operations, its
changes in net financial assets, and its cash flows for the nine-months then ended in accordance
with Canadian public sector accounting standards.

Basis for opinion
I conducted my audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards. My
responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor's Responsibilities for the
Audit of the Financial Statements section of my report. I am independent of Recovery Alberta in
accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to my audit of the financial statements
in Canada, and I have fulfilled my other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these
requirements. I believe that the audit evidence I have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to
provide a basis for my opinion.

Emphasis of matter
I draw attention to Note 3 and Note 22 of the financial statements, which describes the
restructuring of Alberta Health Services and establishment of Recovery Alberta, and subsequent
events. My opinion is not modified in respect of this matter.

Other information
The financial statements of Recovery Alberta are included in the Annual Report of the Ministry of
Mental Health and Addiction that is prepared by the Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction. The
other information comprises the information included in the Annual Report of the Ministry of Mental
Health and Addiction relating to Recovery Alberta, but does not include the financial statements of
Recovery Alberta and my auditor’s report thereon. The Annual Report of the Ministry of Mental
Health and Addiction is expected to be made available to me after the date of this auditor’s report.

My opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and I do not express
any form of assurance conclusion thereon.

In connection with my audit of the financial statements, my responsibility is to read the other
information identified above and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially
inconsistent with the financial statements or my knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise
appears to be materially misstated.



Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                  79
Financial Information



If, based on the work I will perform on this other information, I conclude that there is a material
misstatement of this other information, I am required to communicate the matter to those charged
with governance.

Responsibilities of management and those charged with governance for the financial
statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements in
accordance with Canadian public sector accounting standards, and for such internal control as
management determines is necessary to enable the preparation of the financial statements that are
free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.

In preparing the financial statements, management is responsible for assessing Recovery Alberta’s
ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern and
using the going concern basis of accounting unless an intention exists to liquidate or to cease
operations, or there is no realistic alternative but to do so.

Those charged with governance are responsible for overseeing Recovery Alberta’s financial
reporting process.

Auditor's responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements
My objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a
whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor's
report that includes my opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a
guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing
standards will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from
fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably
be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial
statements.

As part of an audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards, I exercise
professional judgement and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit. I also:
• Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due
    to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain
    audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion. The risk of
    not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from
    error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the
    override of internal control.
• Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit
    procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an
    opinion on the effectiveness of Recovery Alberta’s internal control.
• Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting
    estimates and related disclosures made by management.
• Conclude on the appropriateness of management’s use of the going concern basis of accounting
    and, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to
    events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on Recovery Alberta’s ability to continue as a
    going concern. If I conclude that a material uncertainty exists, I am required to draw attention
    in my auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the financial statements or, if such
    disclosures are inadequate, to modify my opinion. My conclusions are based on the audit




80                                                      Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Financial Information



    evidence obtained up to the date of my auditor’s report. However, future events or conditions
    may cause Recovery Alberta to cease to continue as a going concern.
•   Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements, including the
    disclosures, and whether the financial statements represent the underlying transactions and
    events in a manner that achieves fair presentation.

I communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the planned
scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in
internal control that I identify during my audit.



[Original signed by W. Doug Wylie FCPA, FCMA, ICD.D]
Auditor General

June 3, 2025
Edmonton, Alberta




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                   81
Financial Information




Statement of Operations
Recovery Alberta
Nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)


                                                                                        2025
                                                                          Budget                    Actual
                                                                          (Note 4)
 Revenues:
  Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction transfers
    Base operating                                                 $              726,840    $               726,840
    One-time base operating                                                             -                     85,350
    Other operating                                                                60,601                     68,771
    Recognition of expended deferred capital revenue                                    -                         14
  Other government transfers (Note 5)                                               9,304                      9,865
  Fees and charges                                                                  3,485                      2,415
  Donations and non-government contributions (Note 6)                               1,671                      2,512
  Other income (Note 7)                                                             4,188                     12,461
  Net effect of restructuring transaction (Note 3)                                      -                        679

 TOTAL REVENUES                                                                   806,089                    908,907

 Expenses:
  Continuing care                                                                   3,909                      2,688
  Community care                                                                  380,524                    414,507
  Acute care                                                                      210,360                    251,646
  Diagnostic and therapeutic services                                              64,595                     70,787
  Population and public health                                                      2,792                      3,346
  Research and education                                                            3,218                      3,542
  Information technology                                                           24,633                     25,188
  Support services (Note 8)                                                        88,213                     93,314
  Administration (Note 9)                                                          27,845                     27,201

 TOTAL EXPENSES (Schedules 1 and 3)                                               806,089                    892,219

 ANNUAL OPERATING SURPLUS                                                                -                    16,688

 Accumulated surplus, beginning of period                                                -                         -
 Accumulated surplus, end of period (Note 18)                      $                     -   $                16,688


The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




82                                                            Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                   Financial Information




Statement of Financial Position
Recovery Alberta
As at March 31, 2025
(in thousands)


                                                                                       2025
                                                                                      Actual
 Financial Assets:
  Petty cash                                                                   $                    28
  Due from Alberta Health Services                                                             251,863
  Accounts receivable (Note 11)                                                                 25,659
                                                                                               277,550

 Liabilities:
  Accounts payable and accrued liabilities (Note 12)                                           128,479
  Employee future benefits (Note 13)                                                            71,211
  Unexpended deferred operating revenue (Note 14)                                               63,237
  Unexpended deferred capital revenue (Note 15)                                                     14
                                                                                               262,941

 NET FINANCIAL ASSETS                                                                           14,609

 Non-Financial Assets:
  Tangible capital assets (Note 17)                                                              4,198
                                                                                                 4,198
 NET ASSETS BEFORE EXPENDED DEFERRED REVENUE                                                    18,807
 Expended deferred capital revenue (Note 16)                                                     2,119

 NET ASSETS                                                                                     16,688

 Net Assets is comprised of:
  Accumulated surplus (Note 18)                                                                 16,688

                                                                               $                16,688

Contractual Obligations and Contingent Liabilities (Note 19)

The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.

Approved by:




[Original signed by Kerry Bales]
__________________________________
 Kerry Bales
 Board Chair
 Recovery Alberta




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                83
Financial Information




Statement of Change in Net Financial Assets
Recovery Alberta
Nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)


                                                                                                   2025
                                                                                   Budget(i)                Actual

     Annual operating surplus                                                                         $              16,688

     Effect of changes in tangible capital assets:
      Acquisition of tangible capital assets:
        Purchased                                                                                                     (155)
        Leased                                                                                                        (355)
      Amortization and loss on disposals/write-downs of tangible
        capital assets                                                                                                1,049

     Effect of other changes:
      Net decrease in expended deferred capital revenue                                                               (169)
      Net decrease in prepaid expenses                                                                                5,279
      Net debt transferred as a result of restructuring transaction
                                                                                                                     (7,049)
      Net effect of restructuring transaction                                                                          (679)
     Increase in net financial assets for the period                                                                 14,609

     Net financial assets, beginning of period                                                                             -

     Net financial assets, end of period                                                              $              14,609

(i) No budget values are presented as no budget was approved for the statement of change in net financial assets for
    the nine months ended March 31, 2025 (Note 4).

The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




84                                                                    Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                   Financial Information




Statement of Cash Flows
Recovery Alberta
Nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)


                                                                                     2025
                                                                                    Actual
 Operating transactions:
  Annual operating surplus                                                     $                16,688
  Non-cash items:
     Amortization and loss on disposals/write-downs of
       tangible capital assets                                                                    1,049
     Recognition of expended deferred capital revenue                                             (286)
     Change in employee future benefits                                                           6,090
     Net effect of restructuring transaction                                                      (679)
  (Increase) decrease in:
     Accounts receivable related to operating transactions                                     (16,881)
     Due from Alberta Health Services                                                          (60,584)
     Prepaid expenses                                                                             5,279
  Increase (decrease) in:
     Accounts payable and accrued liabilities                                                   53,503
     Unexpended deferred operating revenue                                                      (3,549)
     Cash provided by operating transactions                                                        630

 Capital transactions:
   Purchased tangible capital assets                                                              (155)
  Cash applied to capital transactions                                                            (155)

 Financing transactions:
   Restricted capital contributions received                                                        131
   Payments on obligations under capital leases                                                   (606)
   Cash applied to financing transactions                                                         (475)

 Increase in cash                                                                                      -

 Cash, beginning of period                                                                             -

 Cash, end of period                                                           $                       -


The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                85
Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements
Recovery Alberta
For the nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

Note 1      Authority, Purpose and Operations
            Recovery Alberta was legally established as a Provincial Health Agency (PHA) under the Provincial Health
            Agencies Act (Alberta), effective July 1, 2024, as a result of the Government of Alberta’s initiative to refocus
            the health care system. Effective September 1, 2024, Alberta Health Services (AHS) transferred to
            Recovery Alberta all of the powers, duties, responsibilities and functions of AHS necessary so that
            Recovery Alberta can fulfill its responsibility for the delivery of mental health and addiction services.
            Pursuant to Part 2 of the Provincial Health Agencies Act, RSA 2000 (Alberta), effective June 21, 2024,
            Recovery Alberta, as a PHA is responsible for the delivery of health services and the oversight and
            coordination of the delivery of health services in the health services sector or sectors for which it was
            established. For the purposes of the Act, Recovery Alberta shall:
              (a) deliver health services or arrange for the delivery of health services in accordance with section 1.96,
              (b) oversee the delivery of health services by the parties with whom the provincial health agency has
                  entered into agreements to deliver health services and ensure the accountability of those parties,
              (c) monitor and evaluate the delivery of health services in the health services sector,
              (d) implement the provincial health agency’s approved health plan, approved operational plan and
                  approved additional plans,
              (e) establish priorities relating to the delivery of health services in the health services sector and regularly
                  assess and modify those priorities,
              (f) ensure that health services are delivered in the health services sector in a manner that is responsive
                  to the needs of individuals and communities and supports the integration of health services,
              (g) work with the oversight Minister, sector Ministers, other provincial health agencies, regional health
                  authorities, provincial health corporations, health services delivery organizations and other health
                  services providers to coordinate the delivery of health services within the health services sector and
                  across health services sectors,
              (h) ensure that the transfer of patients and the responsibility for their care within the health services
                  sector and between health services sectors is integrated, efficient and safe,
              (i) consult regularly with the oversight Minister, sector Ministers, other provincial health agencies,
                  regional health authorities and other persons and bodies with respect to issues relating to health
                  services and the delivery of health services within the health services sector and across health
                  services sectors,
              (j) support reasonable access to quality health services in the health services sector,
              (k) assess the health needs of the population related to the health services sector on an ongoing basis
              (l) promote and protect the health of the population and work toward the prevention of disease and
                  injury related to the health services sector,
              (m) exercise any powers and carry out any duties, responsibilities or functions delegated to the provincial
                  health agency by the oversight Minister or sector Minister under section 1.8, and
              (n) do any other thing required by the oversight Minister, the sector Minister or the regulations.
            Recovery Alberta is accountable to the Minister of Mental Health and Addiction (the Minister) for the
            delivery, oversight and coordination of the mental health and addiction services for Albertans.
            The Recovery Alberta financial statements include the assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses
            associated with its responsibilities.

Note 2      Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices
            (a) Basis of Presentation
                 These financial statements have been prepared in accordance with Canadian Public Sector Accounting
                 Standards. In addition, the financial statements include certain disclosures required by the financial
                 directives issued by the Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction (MHA).




86                                                                 Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                    Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)
Recovery Alberta
For the nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

Note 2      Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)
                 Recovery Alberta is responsible for the delivery, oversight and coordination of the mental health and
                 addiction services in Alberta (Note 1) and contracts with various health service providers to support
                 mental health and addiction services throughout Alberta. The largest of these service providers is AHS,
                 who is providing clinical support and corporate services (Note 20). These financial statements do not
                 include AHS’ assets, liabilities or results of operations of these providers. However, the payments for
                 contracts with health service providers such as AHS are recorded as expenses in the Statement of
                 Operations.
            (b) Revenue Recognition
                 All revenues are recorded on an accrual basis, except when the accrual cannot be determined within a
                 reasonable degree of certainty or when estimation is impracticable. Revenues from transactions with
                 performance obligations are recognized when Recovery Alberta provides the promised goods and/or
                 services to a payor. Revenue from transactions with no performance obligations are recognized at their
                 realizable value when Recovery Alberta has the authority to claim or retain an inflow of economic
                 resources and identifies a past transaction or event that gives rise to an asset. Unallocated costs
                 comprising of materials and services contributed by related parties in support of Recovery Alberta’s
                 operations, are not recognized in these financial statements.
                 (i) Government Transfers
                    Transfers from MHA, other Province of Alberta ministries and agencies, and other government
                    entities are referred to as government transfers. Government transfers are monetary or tangible
                    capital asset transfers where the government making the transfer does not receive any goods or
                    services directly in return, expect to be repaid in the future, or expect a direct financial return.
                    Government transfers are recorded as deferred revenue when the stipulations together with
                    Recovery Alberta’s actions and communications as to the use of the transfer, create a liability. These
                    transfers are recognized as revenue as the stipulations are met and, when applicable, Recovery
                    Alberta complies with the communicated use of the transfer.
                    All other government transfers, without stipulations for the use of the transfer, are recorded as
                    revenue when the transfer is authorized and Recovery Alberta meets the eligibility criteria.
                    Deferred revenue consists of unexpended deferred operating revenue, unexpended deferred capital
                    revenue and expended deferred capital revenue. The term deferred revenue in these financial
                    statements refers to the components of deferred revenue as described.
                 (ii) Donations and Non-Government Contributions
                    Donations and non-government contributions are received from individuals, corporations, registered
                    charities, and other not-for-profit organizations. Donations and non-government contributions may
                    be unrestricted or externally restricted for operating or capital purposes.
                    Unrestricted donations, and non-government contributions are recorded as revenue in the year
                    received or in the year the funds are committed to Recovery Alberta if the amount can be reasonably
                    estimated and collection is reasonably assured.
                    Externally restricted donations and non-government contributions are recorded as deferred revenue
                    if the terms for their use, or the terms along with Recovery Alberta’s actions and communications
                    as to their use create a liability. These resources are recognized as revenue as the terms are met
                    and, when applicable, Recovery Alberta complies with the communicated use.
                    In-kind contributions of services and materials from non-related parties are recorded at fair value
                    when such value can reasonably be determined. While volunteers contribute a significant amount
                    of time each year to assist Recovery Alberta, the value of their services is not recognized as revenue
                    and expenses in the financial statements because fair value cannot be reasonably determined.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                  87
Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)
Recovery Alberta
For the nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

Note 2      Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)
                 (iii) Fees and Charges and Other Income
                        Fees and charges and other income are considered revenue arising from exchange transactions
                        with performance obligations. These are recognized in the year that goods are delivered or
                        services are provided by Recovery Alberta. Amounts received for which goods or services have
                        not been provided by year end are recorded as deferred revenue.
                        Other income includes an allocation of investment income recognized by AHS. Portfolio
                        investments are managed centrally by AHS with the income allocated to Recovery Alberta on a
                        pro-rata basis for Recovery Alberta’s share of the portfolio’s income. The investment income
                        recognized by AHS is used as the basis for the income allocation and includes dividend income,
                        interest income, and realized gains or losses on the sale of portfolio investments.
            (c) Expenses
                 Expenses are reported on an accrual basis. The cost of all goods consumed and services received during
                 the year are expensed.
            (d) Financial Instruments
                 Financial instruments comprise financial assets and financial liabilities. Financial assets are assets that
                 could be used to discharge existing liabilities or finance future operations and are not for consumption
                 in the normal course of operations. Financial liabilities are contractual obligations to deliver cash or
                 another financial asset to another entity or to exchange financial instruments with another entity under
                 conditions that are potentially unfavourable to Recovery Alberta.
                 All of Recovery Alberta’s financial assets and financial liabilities are initially recorded at their fair value
                 and are subsequently measured at cost or amortized cost.
                 Recovery Alberta’s financial instruments include cash, accounts receivable, receivable from Alberta
                 Health Services, and accounts payable and accrued liabilities.
                 Contractual obligations are evaluated for the existence of embedded derivatives. Recovery Alberta
                 measures and recognizes embedded derivatives separately from the host contract when the economic
                 characteristics and risk of the embedded derivative are not closely related to those of the host contract,
                 when it meets the definition of a derivative, and when the entire contract is not measured at fair value.
                 An election can be made to either measure the entire contract at fair value or measure the value of the
                 derivative component separately when characteristics of the derivative are not closely related to the
                 economic characteristics and risks of the contract itself. Contracts to buy or sell non-financial items for
                 Recovery Alberta’s normal course of business are not recognized as financial assets or liabilities.
                 Recovery Alberta does not have any embedded derivatives.
                 Financial instruments are adjusted by transaction costs incurred on acquisition and financing costs,
                 which are amortized using the effective interest rate method.
                 All financial assets are assessed for impairment on an annual basis. When a decline is determined to
                 be other than temporary, the amount of the loss is reported as a realized loss on the Statement of
                 Operations.
                 A financial liability or a part thereof is derecognized when it is extinguished.
                 Recovery Alberta has not presented a Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses, as no activities
                 would result in remeasurement gains or losses.
            (e) Accounts receivable
                 Accounts receivable are recognized at the lower of cost or net recoverable value. A valuation allowance
                 is recognized when recovery is uncertain.




88                                                                   Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                     Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)
Recovery Alberta
For the nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

Note 2      Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)
            (f) Tangible Capital Assets
                 Tangible capital assets are recorded at cost less accumulated amortization, which includes amounts that
                 are directly related to the acquisition, design, construction, development, improvement, or betterment of
                 the assets. Cost includes overhead directly attributable to construction and development as well as interest
                 costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition or construction of the asset.
                 Contributed tangible capital assets from non-related entities are recognized at their fair value at the date
                 of the contribution when fair value can be reasonably determined. When Recovery Alberta cannot
                 determine the fair value, it records such contributions at nominal value.
                 The costs less residual values of tangible capital assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives on
                 a straight-line basis as follows:
                                                                                    Useful Life
                        Equipment                                                   3-20 years
                 Leases of tangible capital assets which transfer substantially all benefits and risks of ownership to
                 Recovery Alberta are accounted for as leased equipment and are amortized over the shorter of the term
                 of the lease or their estimated useful lives. Obligations under capital leases are recorded at the present
                 value of the minimum lease payments excluding executory costs (e.g. insurance, maintenance costs, etc.).
                 The discount rate used to determine the present value of the lease payments is the lower of Recovery
                 Alberta’s rate for incremental borrowing and the interest rate implicit in the lease.
                 Tangible capital assets are written down to their net recoverable amount when conditions indicate that they
                 no longer contribute to Recovery Alberta’s ability to provide goods and services or when the value of future
                 economic benefits associated with the tangible capital assets are less than their net book value. Write-
                 downs are recorded as part of amortization and loss on disposals / write-downs of tangible capital assets.
                 Intangibles and other assets inherited by right and that have not been purchased are not recognized in
                 these financial statements. Similarly, works of art, historical treasures, and collections are not recognized
                 as tangible capital assets.
            (g) Employee Future Benefits
                 (i) Defined Benefit Pension Plans
                    Local Authorities Pension Plan (LAPP) and Management Employees Pension Plan (MEPP)
                    Recovery Alberta participates in the LAPP and MEPP which are multi-employer registered defined
                    benefit pension plans. Recovery Alberta accounts for these plans on a defined contribution basis.
                    Accordingly, the pension expense recorded for these plans in these financial statements is comprised
                    of the employer contributions that Recovery Alberta is required to pay for its employees during the
                    fiscal year. LAPP and MEPP set the employer contribution rates on an annual basis based on
                    actuarially pre-determined amounts that are expected to provide the plans’ future benefits.
                 (ii) Defined Contribution Pension Plans
                    Group Registered Retirement Savings Plans (GRRSPs)
                    Recovery Alberta sponsors GRRSPs for certain employee groups. Under the GRRSPs, Recovery
                    Alberta matches a certain percentage of any contribution made by plan participants up to certain limits.
                    Supplemental Pension Plan (SPP)
                    The SPP supplements the benefits under Recovery Alberta registered plans that are limited by the
                    Income Tax Act (Canada). Recovery Alberta contributes a percentage of an eligible employee’s
                    pensionable earnings, in excess of the limits of the Income Tax Act (Canada). The SPP provides
                    participants with an account balance at retirement based on the contributions made to the plan and
                    investment income earned on the contributions based on investment decisions made by the participant.



Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                   89
Financial Information



Note 2      Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)
                (iii) Other Benefit Plans
                        Accumulating Non-Vesting Sick Leave
                        Sick leave benefits accumulate with employees’ service and are provided by Recovery Alberta to
                        certain employee groups of Recovery Alberta, as defined by employment agreements, to cover
                        illness related absences that are outside of short-term and long-term disability coverage. Benefit
                        amounts are determined and accumulate with reference to employees’ earnings at the time they
                        are paid out. The cost of the accumulating non-vesting sick leave benefits is expensed as the
                        benefits are earned.
                        Recovery Alberta recognizes a liability and expense for accumulating non-vesting sick leave
                        benefits using an actuarial cost method as the employees render services to earn the benefits.
                        The liability and expense is determined using the projected benefit method pro-rated for service
                        and management’s best estimates of expected discount rate, inflation, rate of compensation
                        increase, termination and retirement dates, sick leave accumulation and utilization, and mortality.
                        Actuarial gains and losses are amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected average
                        remaining service life of the related employee groups.
                        Recovery Alberta does not record a liability for sick leave benefits that do not accumulate beyond
                        the current reporting year as these are renewed annually.
                        Other Benefits
                        Recovery Alberta provides its employees with basic life, accidental death and dismemberment,
                        short-term disability, long-term disability, extended health, dental, and vision benefits through
                        benefits carriers. Recovery Alberta fully accrues its obligations for employee non-pension future
                        benefits.
            (h) Reserves

                Certain amounts, as approved by the Recovery Alberta Board, may be set aside in accumulated surplus
                for use by Recovery Alberta for future purposes. Transfers to, or from, are recorded to the respective
                reserve account when approved.
            (i) Measurement Uncertainty
                The financial statements, by their nature, contain estimates and are subject to measurement
                uncertainty. Measurement uncertainty exists when there is a difference between the recognized or
                disclosed amount and another reasonably possible amount. These estimates and assumptions are
                reviewed at least annually. Actual results could differ from the estimates determined by management in
                these financial statements, and these differences could require adjustment in subsequent reporting
                years.
                The amount recorded for amortization of tangible capital assets is based on the estimated useful life of
                the related assets while the recognition of expended deferred capital revenue depends on when the
                terms for the use of the funding are met and, when applicable, Recovery Alberta complies with its
                communicated use of the funding. The amounts recorded for accumulating non-vesting sick leave are
                based on various assumptions including the estimated service life of employees, drawdown rate of sick
                leave banks and rate of salary escalation.




90                                                                  Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                  Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)
Recovery Alberta
For the nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

Note 2      Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)
            (j) Future Accounting Changes
                 On April 1, 2026, Recovery Alberta will adopt the following new conceptual framework and accounting
                 standard approved by the Public Sector Accounting Board:
                     •   The Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting in the Public Sector
                         The Conceptual Framework is the foundation for public sector financial reporting standard
                         setting. It replaces the conceptual aspects of Section PS 1000 Financial Statement Concepts
                         and Section PS 1100 Financial Statement Objectives. The conceptual framework highlights
                         considerations fundamental for the consistent application of accounting issues in the absence
                         of specific standards.
                     •   PS 1202 Financial Statement Presentation
                         Section PS 1202 sets out general and specific requirements for the presentation of information
                         in general purpose financial statements. The financial statement presentation principles are
                         based on the concepts within the Conceptual Framework.
                 Management is currently assessing the impact of the conceptual framework and the standard on the
                 Recovery Alberta financial statements.

Note 3      Restructuring of AHS and Establishment of Recovery Alberta
            In accordance with the Government of Alberta’s ministerial orders related to the restructuring of AHS, all
            responsibilities and the oversight and coordination of the delivery of mental health and addiction services,
            along with related assets, liabilities, and funding agreements were transferred from AHS to Recovery Alberta
            effective September 1, 2024. Recovery Alberta is associated with AHS since both entities are accountable
            to their respective Ministries within the Government of Alberta. Recovery Alberta did not provide or receive
            any compensation related to the transfer of assets and liabilities.
                                                                                              September 1, 2024
                  Financial assets:
                   Petty cash                                                          $                         28
                   Due from AHS                                                                            191,279
                   Accounts receivable                                                                       8,778
                                                                                                           200,085

                  Liabilities:
                   Accounts payable and accrued liabilities                                                 75,227
                   Employee future benefits                                                                 65,121
                   Unexpended deferred operating revenue                                                    66,786
                                                                                                           207,134


                  Non-financial assets:
                   Tangible capital assets                                                                   4,737
                   Prepaid expenses                                                                          5,279
                                                                                                            10,016

                  Expended deferred capital revenue                                                          2,288

                  Net effect of restructuring                                          $                       679



Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                 91
Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)
Recovery Alberta
For the nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

Note 3      Restructuring of AHS and Establishment of Recovery Alberta (continued)
                 (a) The tangible capital assets transferred to Recovery Alberta includes equipment with a cost of
                 $18,203 and accumulated amortization of $13,466 (Note 17). Obligations under capital leases
                 transferred to Recovery Alberta were $1,522 (Note 12).
                 The related sector contractual obligations were also transferred to Recovery Alberta. Contracts
                 transferred to Recovery Alberta for $262,703 were related to the continuum of mental health and
                 addiction services and supports, from prevention and intervention to treatment and recovery.
                 Recovery Alberta entered into a Transition Services Framework Agreement (TSFA), Cooperation
                 Agreement and Information Management and Information Sharing Agreement with AHS effective
                 September 1, 2024. Together, these agreements will govern the relationship between AHS and
                 Recovery Alberta. Under the TSFA, AHS has agreed to provide transition services to Recovery Alberta.
                 The transition services include all clinical and corporate support services provided by AHS to itself
                 including but not limited to nutrition, food, linen & environmental services, capital management,
                 information technology, protective services, pharmacy services, human resources, financial operations,
                 APL services and health information management.
                 The TSFA commenced on the effective date and continues until August 31, 2026. Obligations under this
                 agreement are $264,194 for the year ending March 31, 2026, and $110,744 for the year ending March
                 31, 2027 (Note 19).

Note 4      Budget
                 The nine months ended March 31, 2025 Statement of Operations budget was approved by the Recovery
                 Alberta Board on August 28, 2024, and thereafter submitted to and approved by the Minister of Mental
                 Health and Addiction. No budget was prepared or approved for the Statement of Financial Position as
                 the assets and liabilities that were transferring from AHS to Recovery Alberta, as part of the restructuring
                 transaction, were still being identified at the time of budget submission.




92                                                                 Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                      Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)
Recovery Alberta
For the nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

Note 5      Other Government Transfers
                                                                                     Budget                  2025
              Recognition of expended deferred capital revenue (Note           $                  -   $               221
              16)
              Restricted operating (Note 14)                                                  3,634                 4,125
              Unrestricted operating                                                          5,670                 5,519
                                                                               $              9,304   $             9,865
            Other government transfers include $6,548 (Note 20) transferred from the Province of Alberta, $3,317 from
            government entities outside the Province of Alberta and exclude amounts from MHA as these amounts are
            separately disclosed on the Statement of Operations.

Note 6      Donations and Non-Government Contributions
                                                                                     Budget                  2025
             Recognition of expended deferred capital revenue (Note            $                  -   $               51
             16)
             Restricted operating (Note 14)                                                   1,612                 1,688
             Unrestricted operating                                                              59                   773
                                                                               $              1,671   $             2,512

Note 7      Other Income
                                                                                     Budget                  2025
             Other income:
               AHS(i)                                                          $                  -   $           5,251
               Other Province of Alberta Ministries (Note 20)                                     -               1,356
               Other(ii)                                                                      4,188               5,854
                                                                               $              4,188   $          12,461

            (i) Other income from AHS comprises an allocation of investment income recognized by AHS.
            (ii) Other mainly relates to recoveries for services provided to third parties.


Note 8      Support Services
                                                                                     Budget                  2025
             Facilities operations                                             $          41,326      $         41,522
             Patient health records, food services, and transportation                    19,268                19,122
             Housekeeping, laundry, and linen                                             12,332                12,324
             Materials management                                                           4,133                 4,132
             Ancillary operations                                                           2,730                 2,730
             Other                                                                          8,424               13,484
                                                                               $          88,213      $         93,314

Note 9      Administration
                                                                                     Budget                  2025
             General administration                                            $          14,196      $         13,317
             Human resources                                                                6,860                 6,860
             Finance                                                                        3,620                 3,620
             Communications                                                                 3,169                 3,404
                                                                               $          27,845      $         27,201




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                       93
Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)
Recovery Alberta
For the nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

Note 10     Financial Risk Management

            Recovery Alberta is exposed to a variety of financial risks associated with its financial instruments. These
            financial risks include market risk, credit risk, and liquidity risk.

           (a) Market Risk

                 Market risk is the risk that the fair value or future cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate due
                 to changes in market prices. Market risk is comprised of three types of risk: price risk, interest rate risk,
                 and foreign currency risk. Recovery Alberta does not hold portfolio investments or debt, and therefore
                 market risk is minimal.

           (b) Credit Risk

                 Credit risk is the risk of loss arising from the failure of a counterparty to fully honour its contractual
                 obligations. Recovery Alberta’s receivables are exposed to credit risk, however, these amounts are
                 largely due from MHA and AHS; therefore, the credit risk is minimal.

            (c) Liquidity Risk

                 Liquidity risk is the risk that Recovery Alberta will encounter difficulty under both normal and stressed
                 conditions in meeting obligations associated with financial liabilities that are settled by delivery of cash
                 or another financial asset. Recovery Alberta’s accounts payable and accrued liabilities are exposed to
                 liquidity risk; however, the risk is minimal as AHS is responsible for settling the majority of Recovery
                 Alberta’s obligations mainly through funding provided by MHA.

                 The following are contractual maturities of the remaining financial liabilities as at March 31, 2025 based
                 on expected undiscounted cash flows.

                                              Due in less than 1 year         Due in 1-5 years          Due after 5 years
                 Payroll payable and
                  related accrued
                  liabilities                 $                 121,166 $                         - $                       -
                 Trade accounts payable
                  and accrued liabilities                         6,042                           -                         -
                 Other liabilities                                  455                         816                         -
                                              $                 127,663 $                       816 $                       -

Note 11     Accounts Receivable
                                                                                     2025
                                                                                  Allowance
                                                           Gross                 for Doubtful                  Net
                                                                                  Accounts
              Patient accounts receivable           $              2,050 $                       13 $                 2,037
              Other operating transfers                           19,812                          -                  19,812
               receivable(i)
              Other accounts receivable                            3,810                          -                   3,810
                                                    $             25,672 $                       13 $                25,659

            (i) Other operating transfers receivable includes $15,943 contributions receivable from MHA.




94                                                                  Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                  Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)
Recovery Alberta
For the nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

Note 12     Accounts Payable and Accrued Liabilities
                                                                                                     2025
             Payroll payable and related accrued liabilities                                  $               121,166
             Trade accounts payable and accrued liabilities                                                     6,042
             Obligations under capital leases(a)                                                                1,271
                                                                                              $               128,479

            (a) Obligations under capital leases include vehicle leases for fleet vehicles.
                 The obligations will be settled between 2026 and 2030 and have an implicit interest rate payable of 3.97%.
                 Recovery Alberta is committed to making principal payments for obligations under capital leases as
                 follows:
                                   March 31                                   Minimum Contract Payments
                                    2026                             $                     455
                                    2027                                                   398
                                    2028                                                   246
                                    2029                                                   141
                                    2030                                                    31
                                                                     $                    1,271

Note 13     Employee Future Benefits
                                                                                                    2025
              Accrued vacation pay                                                        $                    59,136
              Accumulating non-vesting sick leave(a)                                                           12,075
                                                                                          $                    71,211

            (a) Accumulating Non-Vesting Sick Leave
                 Sick leave benefits are paid by Recovery Alberta; there are no employee contributions and no assets
                 set aside to support the obligation.
                                                                                                    2025
                 Funded status – deficit                                                  $                    13,978
                 Unamortized net actuarial gain                                                                (1,903)
                 Accrued benefit liability                                                $                    12,075

                 Key assumptions used in the determination of the accumulating non-vesting sick leave liability are:
                                                                                                     2025
                 Estimated average remaining service life                                                    13 years
                 Draw down rate of accumulated non-vesting sick leave bank                                     24.10%
                 Discount rate – beginning of year                                                              5.00%
                 Discount rate – end of year                                                                    3.63%
                 Rate of compensation increase per year                                                       2024-25
                                                                                                                2.00%
                                                                                                              2025-26
                                                                                                                3.00%
                                                                                                              2026-27
                                                                                                                3.00%
                                                                                                            Thereafter
                                                                                                                2.75%




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                    95
Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)
Recovery Alberta
For the nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

Note 13     Employee Future Benefits (continued)
            (b) Local Authorities Pension Plan (LAPP)
                 (i)     Recovery Alberta Participation in the LAPP
                         The majority of Recovery Alberta employees participate in the LAPP. Recovery Alberta is not
                         responsible for future funding of the plan deficit other than through contribution increases. As
                         Recovery Alberta is exposed to the risk of contribution rate increases, the following disclosure is
                         provided to explain this risk.
                         The LAPP provides for a pension of 1.4% for each year of pensionable service based on the average
                         salary of the highest five consecutive years up to the average Canada Pension Plan’s Year’s
                         Maximum Pensionable Earnings (YMPE), over the same five consecutive year period and 2.0% on
                         the excess, subject to the maximum pension benefit limit allowed under the Income Tax Act
                         (Canada). The maximum pensionable service allowable under the plan is 35 years.
                 (ii)    LAPP Surplus
                         The LAPP carried out an actuarial valuation as at December 31, 2023 and these results were then
                         extrapolated to December 31, 2024. The LAPP reported a surplus at December 31, 2024 of
                         $19,557,148.
                         The 2025 and 2024 LAPP contribution rates are as follows:
                                          Calendar 2025                                     Calendar 2024
                                Employer               Employees                  Employer               Employees
                          8.45% of pensionable 7.45% of pensionable         8.45% of pensionable 7.45% of pensionable
                            earnings up to the      earnings up to the        earnings up to the      earnings up to the
                          YMPE and 11.65% of YMPE and 10.65% of             YMPE and 11.65% of YMPE and 10.65% of
                               the excess              the excess                the excess              the excess

            (c) Pension Expense
                                                                                                            2025
                       Local Authorities Pension Plan                                         $                    37,754
                       Defined contribution pension plans and group RRSPs                                           2,654
                       Other pension plans                                                                             66
                                                                                              $                    40,474




96                                                                    Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                   Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)
Recovery Alberta
For the nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

Note 14     Unexpended Deferred Operating Revenue
            (a) Changes in the unexpended deferred operating revenue balance are as follows:
                                                                                       2025
                                                                                            Donors and
                                                                                 Other
                                                                    MHA                 (i)    Non-            Total
                                                                              Government
                                                                                            Government
                  Balance, beginning of period               $              - $         - $          - $                -
                  Balance transferred from AHS September
                  1, 2024 (Note 3)                                    64,985             40         1,761        66,786
                  Received or receivable during the period            63,013          4,625         3,519        71,157
                  Unexpended deferred operating revenue
                   returned                                                 -              -         (104)        (104)
                  Transferred to unexpended deferred capital
                   revenue (ii)                                             -              -           (18)         (18)
                  Recognized as revenue                              (68,771)        (4,125)       (1,688)     (74,584)
                  Balance, end of period                     $         59,227 $          540 $       3,470 $     63,237

                 (i)    The balance for other government includes ($36) of unexpended deferred operating revenue
                        received from government entities outside the Province of Alberta. The remaining balance in other
                        government all relates to the Province of Alberta (Note 20).
                 (ii)   The transfer is mainly comprised of restricted capital funding that was used for approved
                        expenditures that did not meet the definition of a tangible capital asset.
            (b) The unexpended deferred operating revenue balance at the end of the period is externally restricted for
                the following purposes:
                                                                                 2025
                                                                                     Donors and
                                                                         Other
                                                              MHA                       Non-                   Total
                                                                       Government Government
                  Community Care                      $        56,918 $         54 $         600 $               57,572
                  Diagnostic and therapeutic services               -          241         1,721                  1,962
                  Acute care                                    2,233             -          651                  2,884
                  Other                                            76          245           498                    819
                                                      $        59,227 $        540 $       3,470 $               63,237




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                  97
Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)
Recovery Alberta
For the nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

Note 15     Unexpended Deferred Capital Revenue
                 Changes in the unexpended deferred capital revenue balance are as follows:
                                                                                       2025
                                                                                           Donors and
                                                                              Other
                                                            MHA                      (i)      Non-                Total
                                                                           Government
                                                                                           Government
             Balance, beginning of period              $              -    $           - $            - $                   -
             Received or receivable during the                       48             48               17                   113
            period
             Transferred to expended
            deferred capital revenue                                (48)                (34)          (35)            (117)
             Transferred from unexpended
            deferred operating revenue(ii)                             -                  -             18                 18
              Balance, end of period(iii)              $               -   $             14 $            - $               14

                 (i)     The balance for other government all relates to the Province of Alberta.
                 (ii)    The transfer is mainly comprised of restricted capital funding of approved expenditures that did not
                         meet the definition of a tangible capital asset.
                 (iii)   The unexpended deferred capital revenue balance at the end of the period of $14 is externally
                         restricted by Alberta Health for purpose of equipment purchases.

Note 16     Expended Deferred Capital Revenue
                 Changes in the expended deferred capital revenue balance are as follows:
                                                                                            2025
                                                                                                Donors and
                                                                                     Other
                                                                      MHA                          Non-             Total
                                                                                  Government(i)
                                                                                                Government
                 Balance, beginning of period                   $               - $         - $            - $                  -
                 Balance transferred from AHS on
                  September 1, 2024 (Note 3)                                   43          1,776          469             2,288
                 Transferred from unexpended deferred
                  capital revenue                                              48              34            35            117
                 Recognized as revenue                                     (14)            (221)         (51)             (286)
                 Balance, end of period                         $            77     $      1,589 $       453 $            2,119

                   (i)   The balance in other government all relates to the Province of Alberta (Note 20).




98                                                                    Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                           Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)
Recovery Alberta
For the nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

Note 17     Tangible Capital Assets
                                                      Balance
                                                   transferred as                           Disposals/
                             Cost                                          Additions                                2025
                                                  at September 1,                          Write-downs
                                                    2024 (Note 3)
                 Equipment                        $        16,681 $                155 $               (90) $            16,746

                 Leased equipment                          1,522                   355                    -               1,877
                                                  $         18,203 $               510 $               (90) $            18,623

                                                       Balance
                                                    transferred as Amortization     Disposals/
                 Accumulated Amortization                                                                           2025
                                                  at September 1,    Expense       Write-downs
                                                     2024 (Note 3)
                 Equipment                        $         13,466 $         443 $          (90) $                       13,819
                 Leased equipment                                  -         606               -                            606
                                                  $         13,466 $       1,049 $          (90) $                       14,425

                                                                                                  Net Book Value
                                                                                                       2025
                                    Equipment                                              $                              2,927
                                    Leased equipment                                                                      1,271
                                                                                           $                              4,198

Note 18     Accumulated Surplus
            Accumulated surplus is comprised of the following:
                                                                                   2025
                                                   Unrestricted            Invested in Tangible
                                                                                                                 Total
                                                     Surplus                 Capital Assets(a)
             Balance, beginning of
               period                         $                   - $                       -          $                      -
             Annual operating surplus                        16,688                                -                     16,688
             Net investment in tangible
               capital assets                                 (808)                              808                           -
             Balance, end of period           $              15,880 $                      808         $                 16,688

            (a) Invested in Tangible Capital Assets
                  Invested in tangible capital assets represents the portion of accumulated surpluses that has been
                  invested in the acquisition of Recovery Alberta’s assets.
                  Reconciliation of invested in tangible capital assets:

                                                                                                                2025
                   Tangible capital assets (Note 17)                                                   $                 4,198
                    Less funded by:
                      Expended deferred capital revenue (Note 16)                                                      (2,119)
                      Obligations under capital leases (Note 12)                                                       (1,271)
                                                                                                       $                   808




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                            99
Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)
Recovery Alberta
For the nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

Note 19     Contractual Obligations and Contingent Liabilities
            (a) Contractual Obligations
                 Contractual obligations are Recovery Alberta’s obligations to others that will become liabilities in the
                 future when the terms of those contracts or agreements are met.
                 The estimated aggregate amount payable for the unexpired terms of these contractual obligations are
                 as follows:
                         Year ended
                                                    Services(i)                   Other(ii)                     Total
                          March 31
                             2026            $               384,806      $                   4,501    $                389,307
                             2027                            139,190                          2,250                     141,440
                             2028                              4,079                          2,250                       6,329
                             2029                                360                              -                         360
                             2030                                 50                              -                          50
                          Thereafter                               -                              -                           -
                        March 31, 2025       $               528,485      $                   9,001    $                537,486

                 (i)      Service obligations include $375M in contractual commitments under the Transition Services
                          Framework Agreement (Note 3).
                 (ii)     Other obligations include contractual commitments to the Rural Capacity Investment Fund to fund
                          nursing recruitment and retention strategies in rural and remote areas of Alberta.
            (b) Contingent Liabilities
                         (i)   Legal Claims
                               Recovery Alberta is subject to legal claims during its normal course of business. Recovery
                               Alberta recognizes a liability when the assessment of a claim indicates that a future event is
                               likely to confirm that a liability has been incurred at the date of the financial statements and the
                               amount of the contingent loss can be reasonably estimated.
                               Recovery Alberta has been named in 1 legal claim related to conditions in existence at March
                               31, 2025 where the likelihood of the occurrence of a future event confirming a contingent loss
                               is not determinable. This claim has no specified amount. The resolution of indeterminable
                               claims may result in a liability, if any, that is different than the claimed amount. Subsequent to
                               year end, a decision was made in the court of appeals, which changed Recovery Alberta’s
                               assessment to unlikely.
                          (ii) Collective Agreements
                               Recovery Alberta currently has 5 collective agreements that have expired as at March 31,
                               2025. Given that negotiations are ongoing or have not commenced, no additional disclosures
                               have been made.




100                                                                      Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                   Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)
Recovery Alberta
For the nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

Note 20     Related Parties
            Transactions with related parties are included within these financial statements, unless otherwise stated.
            The Minister appoints all members of the Recovery Alberta Board. The viability of Recovery Alberta’s
            operations depends on transfers from MHA. Transactions between Recovery Alberta and MHA are reported
            and disclosed in the Statement of Operations, the Statement of Financial Position, and the Notes to the
            Financial Statements, and are therefore excluded from the tables below.
            Related parties also include key management personnel of Recovery Alberta. Recovery Alberta has defined
            key management personnel to include those disclosed in Schedules 2A and 2B of these financial
            statements, except management reporting to CEO direct reports. Related party transactions with key
            management personnel primarily consist of compensation related payments and are undertaken on similar
            terms and conditions to those adopted if the entities were dealing at arm’s length.
            Recovery Alberta is a related party with respect to those entities consolidated or included on a modified
            equity basis in the financial statements of the Province of Alberta. Entities consolidated or included on a
            modified equity basis have been grouped with their respective ministry and transactions between Recovery
            Alberta and the other ministries are recorded at their exchange amount as follows:
                                                                          Revenues(a)                Expenses
                                                                             2025                       2025
             AHS(b)                                                   $                   -    $             165,097
             Ministry of Assisted Living and Social Services(c)                       4,937                      151
             School Boards(d)                                                           938                    9,269
             Other ministries                                                         2,177                        -
             Total for the period                                     $               8,052    $             174,517

                                                                       Receivable from               Payable to
                                                                             2025                       2025
             AHS(b)                                                   $             251,863    $                    -
             Ministry of Assisted Living and Social Services(c)                       1,153                         -
             School Boards(d)                                                           363                       397
             Other ministries                                                           140                         -
             Balance, end of period                                   $             253,519    $                  397

                 (a)   Revenues with Province of Alberta ministries include other government transfers of $6,548 (Note
                       5), and other income of $1,356 (Note 7).
                 (b)   The transactions with AHS relate to services provided by AHS in accordance with the TSFA. The
                       period end receivable relates primarily to the restructuring transaction and represents Recovery
                       Alberta’s share of cash and investments centrally managed by AHS (Note 3). The receivable from
                       AHS is unsecured, non-interest bearing and has no fixed terms of repayment.
                 (c)   Transactions with the Ministry of Assisted Living and Social Services relate to various health
                       programs promoting wellness aimed to improve quality of life and integration of patients back in
                       community living.
                 (d)   Transactions with the School Boards relate to providing health programs in schools promoting
                       Mental Health in Children and Youth. The provincial School Boards are accountable to and funded
                       by the Ministry of Education and Childcare.
              At March 31, 2025, Recovery Alberta has recorded deferred revenue from other ministries within the
              Province of Alberta, excluding MHA, of $576 related to unexpended deferred operating revenue (Note
              14) and $1,589 related to expended deferred capital revenue (Note 16).



Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                               101
Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)
Recovery Alberta
For the nine months ended March 31, 2025

Note 21     Segment Disclosure
            The Schedule of Segment Disclosures – Schedule 3 is intended to enable users to better understand the
            reporting entity and identify the resources allocated to the major activities of Recovery Alberta.
            Recovery Alberta’s revenues, as reported on the Statement of Operations, are most informatively
            presented by source and are not reasonably assignable to the reportable segments. For each reported
            segment, the expenses are directly or reasonably attributable to the segment.
            The segments have been selected based on the presentation that is adopted for the financial reporting,
            planning and budget processes, and represent the major distinguishable activities of Recovery Alberta.
            Segments include:
            (a) Continuing care
                Continuing care is comprised of mental health and addiction psychiatric long-term care.
            (b) Community care
                Community care is comprised of community bed-based services such as detoxification, addiction
                treatment, and mental health supports. This includes the provision of addiction and mental health
                services via outpatient, virtual, and outreach services.
            (c) Acute care
                Acute care is comprised predominantly of mental health and addiction patient-care units.
            (d) Diagnostic and therapeutic services
                Diagnostic and therapeutic services is comprised of rehabilitation services such as physiotherapy,
                occupational therapy, respiratory therapy and speech-language pathology, diagnostic, and pharmacy
                services.
            (e) Population and public health
                Population and public health is comprised primarily of health promotion and harm reduction services.
            (f) Research and education
                Research and education is comprised primarily of costs pertaining to formally organized mental health
                and addiction research and education.
            (g) Information technology
                Information technology is comprised of costs pertaining to the provision of service and consultation in
                the design, development, implementation, security and support of information technology services and
                systems.
            (h) Support services
                Support services is comprised of building maintenance operations (including utilities), materials
                management (including purchasing, central warehousing, distribution, and sterilization), housekeeping,
                patient registration, health records, food services, emergency preparedness, and infection prevention
                and control.
            (i) Administration
                Administration is comprised of human resources, finance, communications, and general administration.
                General administration includes senior executives and many functions such as planning and
                development, quality assurance, patient safety, insurance, privacy, public relations, risk management,
                internal audit, legal, and coordination of virtual health services.




102                                                             Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                    Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)
Recovery Alberta
For the nine months ended March 31, 2025

Note 22   Subsequent Events
          The Government of Alberta also announced that a new shared services entity is expected to be established
          and become operational in 2025. This entity will provide corporate and support services for all four provincial
          health agencies, and service providers. The operational date and the full financial effect, including the impact
          on Recovery Alberta’s assets, liabilities and operations is currently unknown.
Note 23   Approval of Financial Statements
          The financial statements were approved by the Recovery Alberta Board on June 3, 2025, and submitted to the
          Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                 103
Financial Information




Schedule 1: Expenses – Detailed by Object
Recovery Alberta
For the nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

                                                                                     2025
                                                                      Budget                       Actual
                                                                      (Note 4)

 Salaries and benefits                                        $                484,130    $               565,117
 Contracts with health service providers                                       292,571                    296,170
 Drugs and gases                                                                 7,557                      7,754
 Medical supplies                                                                1,517                      1,181
 Other contracted services                                                       8,956                     11,974
 Other(a)                                                                       11,358                      8,974
 Amortization and loss on disposals/write-downs of tangible
  capital assets (Note 17)                                                           -                      1,049
                                                              $                806,089    $               892,219

 (a) Significant amounts included in Other are:
   Travel                                                     $                   1,920   $                 1,607
   Office supplies and courier                                                    3,164                     1,442
   Housekeeping, laundry and linen, staff wearing
      apparel, plant maintenance and biomedical
      engineering supplies                                                        1,051                       955
   Food and dietary supplies                                                        692                       890
   Equipment expense                                                                959                       748
   Minor equipment purchases                                                        286                       573
   Building rent                                                                    432                       441
   Education                                                                        284                       232
   Building and ground expenses                                                     190                       198
   Licences, fees, and memberships                                                  192                        77
   Insurance and liability claims                                                    14                        24
   Telecommunications                                                                28                         5
   Utilities                                                                          2                         3
   Other                                                                          2,144                     1,779
                                                              $                  11,358   $                 8,974




104                                                           Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                Financial Information




Schedule 2: Remuneration and Benefits
Recovery Alberta
For the nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)



Schedule 2A – Board Remuneration
                                                                                                                         2025
                                                          Term                                                        Remuneration
 Board Chair
 Kerry Bales                                      Since Jul 1, 2024                                                   $             -

 Total Board                                                                                                          $             -

The Board Chair was not remunerated for this position.




Schedule 2B – Executive Remuneration and Benefits
                                                                                              2025
                                                                                Other    Other
                                                                 Base
                                                                                Cash Non-Cash             Severance
        For the Current Fiscal Period              FTE (a)      Salary (b,                       Subtotal     (e)   Total
                                                                    f)         Benefits Benefits
                                                                                 (c)          (d)

Board Direct Reports
Kerry Bales – Chief Executive Officer(g, p)              0.75 $          319 $          5$           79 $    403 $          -$    403
CEO Direct Reports
Chief Operating Officer(h, q)                            0.58            163            1            46      210            -     210
Interim Chief Medical Officer(i, r)                      0.40            212            -             -      212            -     212
Lead, Communications(j, q)                               0.33             48            -            16       64            -      64
General Counsel(k, q)                                    0.35             70            3            18       91            -      91
Lead, Strategy, Planning and Performance(l, q)           0.58             86            5            22      113            -     113
Lead, Medical Affairs(m, q)                              0.58             91            -            24      115            -     115
Lead, People and Culture(n, q)                           0.58             99            -            25      124            -     124
Lead, Finance(o, q)                                      0.58             91            -            29      120            -     120



Total Executive                                          4.73 $     1,179 $            14 $         259 $   1,452 $         - $ 1,452


Management Reporting to CEO Direct
Reports                                                  3.37 $          708 $          3$          163 $    874 $          - $   874




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                             105
Financial Information




Schedule 2: Remuneration and Benefits (continued)
Recovery Alberta
For the nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)



Schedule 2C – Executive Supplemental Pension Plan
Certain employees will receive retirement benefits that supplement the benefits limited under the registered plans for
service. The Supplemental Pension Plan (SPP) is a defined contribution plan. The amounts in this table represent the
total SPP benefits earned by the individual during the fiscal period. The current period benefit costs for SPP included in
other non-cash benefits disclosed in Schedule 2B are prorated for the period of time the individual was in their position
directly reporting to the Board or directly reporting to the Chief Executive Officer. Only individuals holding a position
directly reporting to the Board or Chief Executive Officer during the current fiscal period are disclosed.

                                                  2025
                                                  SPP
                                           Current
                                                                          Account                                   Account
                                           Period                                            Change During
                                                          Total           Balance(2)                                Balance(2)
                                           Benefit                                            the Period(3)
                                                                         July 1, 2024                             March 31, 2025
                                           Costs(1)
Kerry Bales - Chief Executive
Officer(4)                             $         15 $             15 $                  -$               320 $                 320
Chief Operating Officer(4)                            4            4                    -                     7                    7
Interim Chief Medical Officer(5)                      -            -                    -                     -                       -
Lead, Communications(6)                               -            -                    -                     -                       -
General Counsel(6)                                    -            -                    -                     -                       -
Lead, Strategy, Planning and
Performance(6)                                        -            -                    -                     -                       -
Lead, Medical Affairs(6)                              -            -                    -                     -                       -
Lead, People and Culture(6)                           -            -                    -                     -                       -
Lead, Finance(6)                                      -            -                    -                     -                       -

(1)   The SPP current period benefit costs are Recovery Alberta contributions earned in the period.
(2)   The account balance represents the total cumulative earned contributions to the SPP as well as cumulative investment gains or
      losses on the contributions.
(3)   Changes in the account balance include the current benefit costs and investment gains or losses related to the account.
(4)   The incumbent’s account balance transitioned from AHS effective September 1, 2024.
(5)   The incumbent is not an employee of Recovery Alberta, and therefore not eligible for enrolment in the SPP.
(6)   The incumbent’s pensionable earnings were below the threshold for enrolment in the SPP.




106                                                                       Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                               Financial Information




Schedule 2: Remuneration and Benefits (continued)
Recovery Alberta
For the nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)


Footnotes to the Schedules of Remuneration and Benefits
Definitions
 a. For this schedule, full time equivalents (FTE) are determined by actual hours earned divided by 2,022.75 annual base hours.
 b. Base salary is regular salary and includes all payments earned related to actual hours earned other than those reported as other
      cash benefits.
 c. Other cash benefits include, as applicable, honoraria, acting pay, membership fees, car allowance, and lump sum payments.
      Relocation expenses are excluded from compensation disclosure as they are considered to be recruiting costs to Recovery
      Alberta and not part of compensation unless related to severance. Expense reimbursements are also excluded from
      compensation disclosure except where the expenses meet the definition of the other cash benefits listed above.
 d. Other non-cash benefits include:
         • Employer’s current period benefit costs of the supplemental pension plan as defined in Schedule 2C
         • Employer’s share of employee benefit contributions and payments made on behalf of employees including pension, health
            care, dental and vision coverage, out-of-country medical benefits, group life insurance, accidental disability and
            dismemberment insurance, and long and short-term disability plans
         • Vacation accruals, and
         • Employer’s share of the cost of additional benefits including sabbaticals or other special leave with pay.
 e. Severance includes direct or indirect payments to individuals upon termination which are not included in other cash benefits or
      other non-cash benefits.
Executive
  f. Base salary reported for executives are the actual payments earned during the period, and is therefore contingent on the number
     of Recovery Alberta’s work days in the period. For the period ended March 31, 2025, the number of work days at Recovery Alberta
     was 196.
  g. Kerry Bales was appointed to the position of Chief Executive Officer effective July 1, 2024. The incumbent was also simultaneously
     appointed Board Chair.
  h. The incumbent held the position of Interim Chief Program Officer, Addiction and Mental Health and Correctional Health Services
     at AHS as at September 1, 2024 at which time the position transitioned to Recovery Alberta as per Ministerial Order 801/2024,
     and they became a direct report to the Chief Executive Officer. The incumbent was subsequently appointed to the position of
     Chief Operating Officer effective November 11, 2024.
  i. The incumbent was appointed Interim Chief Medical Officer effective September 1, 2024. The incumbent’s remuneration is as per
     the terms of a Medical Administrative Services Agreement.
  j. The incumbent was appointed to the position of Lead, Communications effective December 2, 2024.
  k. The incumbent was appointed to the position of General Counsel effective November 25, 2024.
  l. The incumbent held the position of Interim Director, Addiction and Mental Health Transition at AHS as at September 1, 2024 at
     which time the position transitioned to Recovery Alberta as per Ministerial Order 801/2024, and they became a direct report to
     the Chief Executive Officer. The incumbent was subsequently appointed to the position of Lead, Strategy, Planning and
     Performance effective January 20, 2025.
  m. The incumbent held the position of Theme Lead, Medical Affairs at AHS as at September 1, 2024 at which time the position
     transitioned to Recovery Alberta as per Ministerial Order 801/2024, and they became a direct report to the Chief Executive Officer.
     The incumbent was subsequently appointed to the position of Lead, Medical Affairs effective January 20, 2025.
  n. The incumbent held the position of Theme Lead, People and Culture at AHS as at September 1, 2024 at which time the position
     transitioned to Recovery Alberta as per Ministerial Order 801/2024, and they became a direct report to the Chief Executive Officer.
     The incumbent was subsequently appointed to the position of Lead, People and Culture effective January 20, 2025.
  o. The incumbent held the position of Theme Lead, Finance and Corporate Services at AHS as at September 1, 2024 at which time
     the position transitioned to Recovery Alberta as per Ministerial Order 801/2024, and they became a direct report to the Chief
     Executive Officer. The incumbent was subsequently appointed to the position of Lead, Finance effective January 20, 2025.
Termination Obligations
 p. In the case of termination without just cause by Recovery Alberta, the incumbent shall receive severance pay in the amount of
     the lesser of (i) 52 weeks’ salary and benefits; or (ii) the greater of the number of weeks between the date of termination and the
     term date of June 30, 2030; or the minimum notice period required by the Alberta Employee Standards Code.
 q. The incumbent’s termination benefits have not been predetermined, and as such is deemed to be the minimum notice period
     required by the Alberta Employee Standards Code.
 r. There is no severance associated with the Medical Administrative Services Agreement.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                             107
Financial Information




Schedule 3: Segment Disclosures
Recovery Alberta
For the nine months ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

                                                                     2025
                                                                                                  Amortization
                                                                                                  and loss on
                                 Contracts
                        Salaries             Drugs                  Other                          disposals/
                                 with health             Medical
                          and                 and                 contracted         Other        write-downs      Total
                                  service                supplies
                        benefits             gases                 services                        of tangible
                                 providers
                                                                                                     capital
                                                                                                     assets

Continuing care    $         341 $     2,347 $       -$          -$             -$            -$             - $      2,688
Community care           281,518     116,947     4,543        423           5,175       5,394             507      414,507

Acute care               218,534      22,128     3,207        708           4,366       2,283             420      251,646
Diagnostic and            46,925      22,812         4         40            486         500               20        70,787
 therapeutic
 services
Population and             3,151        140          -          2               -            44             9         3,346
 public health
Research and               1,493       2,043         -           -              -            6               -        3,542
 education
Information                  642      24,546         -           -              -             -              -       25,188
  technology
Support services           7,693      84,068         -          5            847         618               83        93,314

Administration             4,820      21,139         -          3           1,100        129               10        27,201


Total              $ 565,117 $       296,170 $   7,754 $    1,181 $     11,974 $        8,974 $          1,049 $ 892,219




108                                                             Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                                      Financial Information




Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence
Financial Statements

Table of Contents

         Management’s Responsibility for Financial Reporting ........................................................110

         Independent Auditor’s Report .......................................................................................................111

         Statement of Operations ...................................................................................................................114

         Statement of Financial Position .....................................................................................................115

         Statement of Change in Net Financial Assets ...........................................................................116

         Statement of Cash Flows ...................................................................................................................117

         Notes to the Financial Statements ................................................................................................118

         Schedule 1: Expenses – Detailed by Object ...............................................................................124

         Schedule 2: Salary and Benefits Disclosure ..............................................................................125

         Schedule 3: Actual Results Compared with Budget ...............................................................126

         Schedule 4: Related Party Transactions .....................................................................................127




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                     109
Financial Information




Management’s Responsibility for Financial Reporting
The accompanying financial statements are the responsibility of management and have been
reviewed and approved by Senior Management. The financial statements were prepared in
accordance with Canadian Public Sector Accounting Standards, and of necessity, include some
amounts that are based on estimates and judgement.

To discharge its responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of financial reporting, management
maintains a system of internal accounting controls comprising written policies, standards and
procedures, and a formal authorization structure. This system provides management with
reasonable assurance that transactions are in accordance with governing legislation and are
properly authorized, reliable financial records are maintained, and assets are adequately
safeguarded.

The Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence’s Board of Directors meets with management and the
Auditor General of Alberta to review financial matters and approves the financial statements upon
finalization of the audit. The Auditor General of Alberta has open and complete access to the
Board of Directors.

The Auditor General of Alberta provides an independent audit of the financial statements. His
examination is conducted in accordance with Canadian Generally Accepted Auditing Standards and
includes tests and procedures, which allow him to report on the fairness of the financial statements
prepared by management.

On behalf of the Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence.




 [Original signed by Kym Kauffman]                     [Original signed by Naren Makwana]
 Chief Executive Officer                               Executive Director, Finance & Corporate Services
 Kym Kauffman                                          Naren Makwana
 May 14, 2025                                          May 14, 2025




110                                                     Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Financial Information




Independent Auditor’s Report

To the Board of Directors of the Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence


Report on the Financial Statements

Opinion
I have audited the financial statements of the Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence, which
comprise the statement of financial position as at March 31, 2025, and the statements of operations,
change in net financial assets, and cash flows for the period from June 21, 2024 to March 31, 2025,
and notes to the financial statements, including a summary of significant accounting policies.

In my opinion, the accompanying financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of the Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence as at March 31, 2025, and the
results of its operations, its changes in net financial assets, and its cash flows for the period then
ended in accordance with Canadian public sector accounting standards.

Basis for opinion
I conducted my audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards. My
responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor's Responsibilities for the
Audit of the Financial Statements section of my report. I am independent of the Canadian Centre of
Recovery Excellence in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to my audit of the
financial statements in Canada, and I have fulfilled my other ethical responsibilities in accordance with
these requirements. I believe that the audit evidence I have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to
provide a basis for my opinion.

Other information
Management is responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the
information included in the Annual Report, but does not include the financial statements and my
auditor’s report thereon. The Annual Report is expected to be made available to me after the date of
this auditor’s report.

My opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and I do not express any
form of assurance conclusion thereon.

In connection with my audit of the financial statements, my responsibility is to read the other
information identified above and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially
inconsistent with the financial statements or my knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise
appears to be materially misstated.

If, based on the work I will perform on this other information, I conclude that there is a material
misstatement of this other information, I am required to communicate the matter to those charged
with governance.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                    111
Financial Information



Responsibilities of management and those charged with governance for the financial
statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements in
accordance with Canadian public sector accounting standards, and for such internal control as
management determines is necessary to enable the preparation of the financial statements that are
free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.

In preparing the financial statements, management is responsible for assessing the Canadian Centre
of Recovery Excellence’s ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters
related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless an intention exists to
liquidate or to cease operations, or there is no realistic alternative but to do so.

Those charged with governance are responsible for overseeing the Canadian Centre of
Recovery Excellence’s financial reporting process.

Auditor's responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements
My objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole
are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor's report
that includes my opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee
that an audit conducted in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards will
always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error
and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to
influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.

As part of an audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards, I exercise
professional judgement and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit. I also:
• Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to
    fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit
    evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion. The risk of not
    detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from
    error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the
    override of internal control.
• Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit
    procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an
    opinion on the effectiveness of the Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence's internal control.
• Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting
    estimates and related disclosures made by management.
• Conclude on the appropriateness of management’s use of the going concern basis of accounting
    and, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to
    events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Canadian Centre of Recovery
    Excellence’s ability to continue as a going concern. If I conclude that a material uncertainty exists,
    I am required to draw attention in my auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the financial
    statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify my opinion. My conclusions are
    based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of my auditor’s report. However, future
    events or conditions may cause the Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence to cease to continue
    as a going concern.




112                                                      Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Financial Information



•   Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements, including the
    disclosures, and whether the financial statements represent the underlying transactions and
    events in a manner that achieves fair presentation.

I communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the planned
scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in
internal control that I identify during my audit.




[Original signed by W. Doug Wylie FCPA, FCMA, ICD.D]
Auditor General

May 14, 2025
Edmonton, Alberta




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                  113
Financial Information




Statement of Operations
Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence
For the Period June 21, 2024 to March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

                                                                                              2025
                                                                               Budget                Actual
                                                                               (Note 4)
Revenues (Note 2(b))
  Government of Alberta grants                                        $           4,300          $      4,300
  Investment income                                                                   -                    87
                                                                                  4,300                 4,387

Expenses (Note 2(b) and Schedule 1)
  Administration                                                                  1,837                   810
  Evaluation and Research                                                         1,914                 1,226
  Communications and Engagement                                                     549                   183
                                                                                  4,300                 2,219

Annual operating surplus                                                                  -             2,168
Accumulated operating surplus, beginning of period                                        -                 -
Accumulated operating surplus, end of period                          $                   -      $      2,168




The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




114                                                           Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Financial Information




Statement of Financial Position
Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence
For the Period June 21, 2024 to March 31, 2025
(in thousands)



                                                                                   2025
           Financial Assets
             Cash (Note 5)                                                     $     2,941
             Accounts receivable                                                         8
                                                                                     2,949
           Liabilities
             Accounts payable and other accrued liabilities                               441
             Unspent deferred contributions (Note 7)                                      688
                                                                                     1,129

           Net Financial Assets                                                      1,820

           Non-Financial Assets
            Tangible capital assets (Note 9)                                              342
            Prepaid expenses                                                                6
                                                                                          348

           Net Assets                                                          $     2,168


           Net Assets
             Accumulated operating surplus                                     $     2,168




            Contractual obligations (Note 10)




The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                  115
Financial Information




Statement of Change in Net Financial Assets
Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence
For the Period June 21, 2024 to March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

                                                                                     2025
                                                                   Budget                              Actual
                                                                    (Note 4)
Annual operating surplus                                   $                           -          $       2,168
      Acquisition of tangible capital assets (Note 9)                                  -                  (345)
      Amortization of tangible capital assets (Note 9)                                 -                       3
      (Increase) in prepaid expenses                                                   -                     (6)
Increase in net financial assets in the period                                         -                  1,820
Net financial assets, beginning of period                                              -                        -
Net financial assets, end of period                        $                           -          $       1,820



The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




116                                                            Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                               Financial Information




Statement of Cash Flows
Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence
For the Period June 21, 2024 to March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

                                                                                      2025
 Operating Transactions
    Annual operating surplus                                                      $    2,168
    Non-cash items included in annual operating surplus:
     Amortization of tangible capital assets (Note 9)                                        3
    (Increase) in accounts receivable                                                     (8)
    (Increase) in prepaid expenses                                                        (6)
    Increase in accounts payable and other accrued liabilities                           441
    Increase in unspent deferred contributions (Note 7)                                  688
    Cash provided by operating transactions                                            3,286


Capital Transactions
    Acquisition of tangible capital assets (Note 9)                                    (345)
    Cash applied to capital transactions                                               (345)



Increase in cash
                                                                                      2,941


Cash at beginning of period                                                                   -

Cash at end of period
                                                                                  $    2,941




The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                             117
Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements
Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence
Year ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)
Note 1           AUTHORITY

                 The Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence (CoRE) is a crown corporation established on June 21,
                 2024 under the Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence Act.

                 Pursuant with the act, CoRE has a mandate to empower decision makers with research and
                 information to advance recovery-oriented mental health and addiction services. CoRE does this by
                 informing best practices, conducting program evaluation and analyzing data to support the
                 development of objective and practical policy.

                 CoRE is exempt from income taxes under the Income Tax Act.

                 Comparative figures are not presented as this is CoRE’s first period of operations.

Note 2           SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND REPORTING PRACTICES

                 These financial statements are prepared in accordance with Canadian Public Sector Accounting
                 Standards (PSAS).

                 (a) Reporting Entity
                 The financial statements reflect the assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses of CoRE.

                 (b) Basis of Financial Reporting

                 Revenues
                 All revenues are reported on the accrual basis of accounting.

                 Cash received for which services have not been provided by year end is recognized as unearned
                 revenue.

                 Revenues from transactions with no performance obligations are recognized at their realizable value
                 when CoRE has the authority to claim or retain an inflow of economic resources and identifies a past
                 transaction or event that gives rise to an asset.

                 Government of Alberta grants

                 Transfers from the Government of Alberta are referred to as provincial grants.

                 Provincial grants and associated externally restricted investment income are recognized as deferred
                 contributions when the stipulations together with CoRE’s actions and communications as to the use of
                 the grants, create a liability. These grants are recognized as revenue as the stipulations are met and,
                 when applicable, CoRE complies with its communicated use of these grants.

                 All other provincial grants, without stipulations for the use of the transfer, are recognized as revenue
                 when the grant is authorized and CoRE meets the eligibility criteria (if any).

                 Investment income

                 Investment income includes interest income held at a Canadian chartered bank.




118                                                               Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                     Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)
Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence
Year ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)
Note 2           SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND REPORTING PRACTICES (CONT’D)

                 (b)     Basis of Financial Reporting (Cont’d)

                 Expenses

                 Expenses are reported on an accrual basis. The cost of all goods consumed and services received
                 during the year are expensed.

                 Valuation of Financial Assets and Liabilities

                 CoRE’s financial assets and liabilities are generally measured as follows:

                       Financial Statement Component                      Measurement
                       Cash                                               Cost
                       Accounts receivable                                Lower of cost or net recoverable value
                       Accounts payable and other accrued liabilities     Cost
                 CoRE does not have any financial instruments classified in the fair value category and does not hold
                 equities traded in an active market, nor engage in derivative contracts or foreign currency
                 transactions. CoRE is not exposed to remeasurement gains or losses and, consequently, a statement
                 of remeasurement gains and losses is not presented.

                 Financial Assets

                 Financial assets are assets that could be used to discharge existing liabilities or finance future
                 operations and are not for consumption in the normal course of operations.

                 Financial assets are CoRE’s financial claims on external organizations and individuals at the year end.

                 Cash

                 Cash is held at a Canadian chartered bank.

                 Accounts Receivable

                 Accounts receivable are recognized at the lower of cost or net recoverable value. A valuation
                 allowance is recognized when recovery is uncertain.

                 Liabilities

                 Liabilities are present obligations of CoRE to external organizations and individuals arising from past
                 transactions or events occurring before year end, the settlement of which is expected to result in the
                 future sacrifice of economic benefits. They are recognized when there is an appropriate basis of
                 measurement and management can reasonably estimate the amounts.

                 Non-Financial Assets

                 Non-financial assets are acquired, constructed, or developed assets that do not normally provide
                 resources to discharge existing liabilities, but instead:

                  (a) are normally employed to deliver services;
                  (b) may be consumed in the normal course of operations; and
                  (c) are not for sale in the normal course of operations.

                 Non-financial assets are limited to tangible capital assets and prepaid expenses.



Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                 119
Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)
Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence
Year ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)
Note 2            SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND REPORTING PRACTICES
                  (CONT’D)

                  (b) Basis of Financial Reporting (Cont’d)

                  Tangible Capital Assets

                  Tangible capital assets are recognized at cost less amortization, which includes amounts that are
                  directly related to the acquisition, design, construction, development, improvement or betterment of
                  the assets. Cost includes overhead directly attributable to construction and development, as well as
                  interest costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition or construction of the asset.

                  The cost, less residual value, of the tangible capital assets, excluding work-in-progress, is amortized
                  on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives as follows:

                        Furniture and office equipment                               10 years

                        Computer hardware and software                                5 years

                  Tangible capital assets are written down when conditions indicate that they no longer contribute to
                  CoRE’s ability to provide services, or when the value of future economic benefits associated with the
                  tangible capital assets are less than their book value. The net write-downs are accounted for as
                  expenses in the Statement of Operations.

                  Prepaid Expenses

                  Prepaid expenses are recognized at cost and amortized based on the terms of the agreement.

                  Measurement Uncertainty

                  Measurement uncertainty exists when there is a variance between the recognized or disclosed
                  amount and another reasonably possible amount. The amounts recognized for amortization of
                  tangible capital assets are based on estimates of the useful life of the related assets. Actual results
                  could differ from estimates.

Note 3           FUTURE CHANGES IN ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
                  On April 1, 2026, CoRE will adopt the following new conceptual framework and accounting standard
                  approved by the Public Sector Accounting Board:

                  •     The Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting in the Public Sector
                  The Conceptual Framework is the foundation for public sector financial reporting standard setting. It
                  replaces the conceptual aspects of Section PS 1000 Financial Statement Concepts and Section PS
                  1100 Financial Statement Objectives. The conceptual framework highlights considerations fundamental
                  for the consistent application of accounting issues in the absence of specific standards.

                  •     PS 1202 Financial Statement Presentation
                  Section PS 1202 sets out general and specific requirements for the presentation of information in
                  general purpose financial statements. The financial statement presentation principles are based on
                  the concepts within the Conceptual Framework.

                  Management is currently assessing the impact of the conceptual framework and the standard on the
                  financial statements.



120                                                               Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                       Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)
Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence
Year ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)
Note 4           BUDGET
                 CoRE’s 2024 - 2025 operating budget was submitted to and approved by the Minister of Mental
                 Health and Addiction.

Note 5           CASH
                 Cash is held in an account with a Canadian chartered bank and earns interest calculated based on
                 the average monthly cash balance. The funds are available to be withdrawn upon request. CoRE’s
                 interest rate arrangement became effective on August 1, 2024. During the 8-month period ended
                 March 31, 2025, CoRE earned interest at an annual average rate of 3.60%.

                 Cash includes restricted funds of $688 as reflected in unspent deferred contributions (Note 7).

Note 6           FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
                 CoRE has the following financial instruments: cash, accounts receivable, accounts payable and other
                 accrued liabilities.

                 CoRE has exposure to the following risks from its use of financial instruments: interest rate risk,
                 liquidity risk and credit risk. CoRE does not have exposure to price risk as it is fully funded by the
                 Government of Alberta. CoRE does not have exposure to foreign exchange risk as its foreign
                 transactions are insignificant.

                 (a)   Interest rate risk
                 Interest rate risk is the risk that the rate of return and future cash flows on CoRE’s cash held in bank
                 accounts will fluctuate because of changes in market interest rates. As CoRE holds bank deposits
                 that are interest bearing and accounts payable that are non-interest bearing, the Corporation is not
                 exposed to significant interest rate risk relating to its financial assets and liabilities.

                 (b)   Liquidity risk
                 Liquidity risk is the risk that CoRE will encounter difficulty in meeting obligations associated with
                 financial liabilities. CoRE enters into transactions to purchase goods and services on credit. Liquidity
                 risk is measured by reviewing CoRE’s future net cash flows for the possibility of negative net cash
                 flow. CoRE manages the liquidity risk resulting from its accounts payable obligations by maintaining
                 adequate cash resources in interest bearing bank deposits.

                 (c)   Credit Risk

                 Credit risk is the risk of loss arising from the failure of a counterparty to fully honor its contractual
                 obligations. CoRE is not exposed to any significant credit risk from potential non-payment of
                 accounts receivable. As at March 31, 2025, the balance of accounts receivable does not contain
                 amounts that are uncollectible.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                        121
Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)
Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence
Year ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)
Note 7            UNSPENT DEFERRED CONTRIBUTIONS
                                                                                                             2025
                                                                                            Ministry of Mental Health
                                                                                                 and Addiction
                   Balance at beginning of the period                                      $                                  -
                   Cash received or receivable during the period                                                            688
                   Recognized as revenue                                                                                      -
                   Balance at end of period                                                $                                688

                  The unspent deferred contribution from the Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction at the end of the
                  period is restricted to conducting initial population based mental health and addiction surveys.

Note 8            BENEFIT PLAN
                  CoRE participates in the Local Authorities Pension Plan (LAPP), a multi-employer defined benefit
                  pension plan. CoRE accounts for this multi-employer pension plan on a defined contribution basis.
                  CoRE is not responsible for future funding of the plan deficit other than through contribution
                  increases. Pension expense recorded in the financial statements is equivalent to CoRE’s annual
                  contributions of $60 for the period ended March 31, 2025.

                  At December 31, 2024, the Local Authorities Pension Plan reported a surplus of $19,557,148 (2023 –
                  surplus of $15,056,661).

Note 9            TANGIBLE CAPITAL ASSETS
                                                                                          2025
                                                                                        Computer
                                                            Furniture &
                                                                                       Hardware &                   Total
                                                            Equipment
                                                                                        Software
                  Estimated Useful Life                      10 years                    5 years


                  Historical Cost
                  Beginning of the period               $                  -       $                 -       $                    -
                  Additions                                              209                       136                       345
                                                                         209                       136                       345


                  Accumulated Amortization
                  Beginning of the period                                      -                         -                        -
                  Amortization expense                                         -                     3                            3
                                                                               -                     3                            3


                  Net book value at March 31, 2025      $               209        $               133        $              342




122                                                                Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                    Financial Information




Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)
Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence
Year ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)
Note 10           CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
                  Contractual obligations are obligations of CoRE to others that will become liabilities in the future when
                  the terms of those contracts or agreements are met.

                  Estimated payment requirements for each of the next five years and thereafter are as follows:



                                                                                        Operating Lease
                        Year ended March 31
                                                                                         and Contracts
                        2025 – 26                                                     $              196
                        2026 – 27                                                                      219
                        2027 – 28                                                                      228
                        2028 – 29                                                                      235
                        2029 – 30                                                                      241
                        Thereafter                                                                      84

                                                                                      $              1,203

Note 11          APPROVAL OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
                 The Board approved CoRE’s financial statements on May 14, 2025.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                 123
Financial Information




Schedule 1: Expenses – Detailed by Object
Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence
For the Period June 21, 2024 to March 31, 2025
(in thousands)


                                                                                 2025
                                                                  Budget
                                                                                          Actual
                                                                  (Note 4)


Salaries, wages, and employee benefits                     $          2,293         $        1,379
Supplies and services                                                 2,007                     837
Amortization of tangible capital assets (Note 9)                             -                     3
Total expenses                                             $          4,300         $        2,219




124                                                Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                   Financial Information




Schedule 2: Salary and Benefits Disclosure
Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence
For the Period June 21, 2024 to March 31, 2025
(in thousands)


                                                                                        2025
                                                         Base        Other Cash         Other Non-Cash
                                                                                                              Total
                                                        Salary (1)   Benefits (2)         Benefits (3)

Board Chair & Chief Executive Officer (4)               $      184    $         38             $     11      $        233
Chief Scientific Officer (5)                                   223                  -                  -              223
Chief Information Officer (6)                                   29                  -                  6               35
Chief Privacy Officer / General Counsel (7)                     53                  -                11                64
Executive Director, Finance & Corporate Services (8)            89                  -                17               106

Executive Director, Communications & Engagement (9)            101                  -                16               117
                                                        $      679    $         38             $     61      $        778


(1) Base salary includes regular salary.

(2) Other cash benefits include pay-in-lieu benefits and vehicle allowance. There were no bonuses paid in 2025.

(3) Other non-cash benefits include employer’s share of benefits and contributions or payments made on behalf of
    employees including pension, health care, dental coverage, and professional memberships.

(4) The incumbent held the position effective July 1, 2024. The Board Chair does not receive remuneration for
    participation on the Board.

(5) The incumbent held the position effective July 1, 2024. CoRE provides compensation to this incumbent as part of
    the agreement with their professional corporation.

(6) The incumbent held the position effective February 10, 2025.

(7) The incumbent held the position effective August 12, 2024. The incumbent is employed on a 0.4 Full-Time
    Equivalent basis.

(8) The incumbent held the position effective September 23, 2024.

(9) The incumbent held the position effective July 31, 2024.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                 125
Financial Information




Schedule 3: Actual Results Compared with Budget
Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence
For the Period June 21, 2024 to March 31, 2025
(in thousands)



                                                  Budget                               Adjusted
                                                               Adjustments (1)                          Actual
                                                  (Note 4)                              Budget

Revenue
 Government of Alberta grants                 $      4,300     $              -    $      4,300     $     4,300
 Investment income                                       -                    -               -              87
                                                     4,300                    -           4,300           4,387

Expenses
 Administration                                      1,837                119             1,956             810
 Evaluation and Research                             1,914                (22)            1,892           1,226
 Communications and Engagement                         549                (97)              452             183
                                                     4,300                    -           4,300           2,219
Annual Operating Surplus                                  -                   -                -          2,168


Capital
 Capital Investment                                       -                   -                -            345
 Less: Amortization of tangible capital                   -                                    -
                                                                              -                              (3)
 assets
 Net capital investment                                   -                   -                -            342

Surplus                                       $           -    $              -    $           -    $     1,826


  (1) Adjustments reflect changes to the original budget approved by the Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction.




126                                                            Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                Financial Information




Schedule 4: Related Party Transactions
Canadian Centre of Recovery Excellence
For the Period June 21, 2024 to March 31, 2025
(in thousands)


Related parties are those entities consolidated or accounted for on a modified equity basis in the Government of
Alberta’s Consolidated Financial Statements. Related parties also include key management personnel and close family
members of those individuals in CoRE. CoRE and its employees paid or collected certain taxes set by regulation.
These amounts were incurred in the normal course of business, reflect charges applicable to all users, and have been
excluded from this schedule.
CoRE had the following transactions with related parties recorded in the Statement of Operations and the Statement of
Financial Position at the amount of consideration agreed upon between the related parties.

                                                                                   2025
           Revenues
                 Grants                                                   $                4,300
                                                                          $                4,300


           Expenses
                 Other services                                                                 -
                                                                          $                     -


           Receivable from related parties                                                      -
                                                                          $                     -


           Payable to related parties                                                           -
                                                                          $                     -


           Transferred from related parties                                                  688
                                                                          $                  688


At March 31, 2025, CoRE recorded $688 in deferred revenue from the Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction related
to unspent deferred contributions (Note 7).




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                            127
Financial Information




Financial Information


Table of Contents
         Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited) ................................................................................................129
         Deferred Contributions (unaudited) ...........................................................................................130




128                                                                             Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                               Financial Information



Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited)
Year ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

Expense Vote by Program                             Voted            Supplementary   Adjustments            Voted              Voted            Expended/
Operating Expense                                 Estimate (1)        Estimate (2)       (3)
                                                                                                           Estimate           Actuals (4)   (Unexpended)
1   Ministry Support Services
1.1 Minister's Office                             $        822       $           -   $             -   $          822     $          781    $         (41)
1.2 Deputy Minister's Office                               926                   -                 -              926                833              (93)
1.3 Corporate Services                                  11,705                 120                 -           11,825             11,973              148
                                                        13,453                 120                 -           13,573             13,587               14
2      Mental Health and Addiction
2.1    Program Support                                   10,448                -             -                 10,448              9,737              (711)
2.2    Compliance and Monitoring                          2,061                -             -                  2,061              1,991               (70)
2.3    Mental Health Review Panel                         2,191                -             -                  2,191              1,945              (246)
2.4    Prevention and Early Intervention                 30,826                -          (6,500)              24,326             20,832            (3,494)
2.5    Treatment and Recovery                           136,819                -         (14,500)             122,319            132,699            10,380
2.6    Initiatives that Reduce Harm                      35,784                -          (2,600)              33,184             28,846            (4,338)
2.7    Children and Youth                                56,235                -         (12,400)              43,835             37,882            (5,953)
2.8    Mental Health and Addiction Services           1,126,938            137,382        45,190            1,309,510          1,309,510               -
2.9    Centre of Recovery Excellence (CoRE)               5,000                -             -                  5,000              4,975               (25)
                                                      1,406,302            137,382         9,190            1,552,874          1,548,417            (4,457)
Capital Grants
2    Addiction and Mental Health
2.4 Prevention and Early Intervention                     -                    -           4,032                4,032             -                 (4,032)
2.5 Treatment and Recovery                             98,957                  -           4,778              103,735          72,530              (31,205)
2.6 Initiatives that Reduce Harm                          -                    -             -                    -               400                  400
2.7 Children and Youth                                 36,000                  -         (18,000)              18,000          18,000                  -
                                                      134,957                  -          (9,190)             125,767          90,930              (34,837)
                                                    1,554,712              137,502           -              1,692,214       1,652,934              (39,280)
                                                  $ 1,554,712        $     137,502   $       -    $         1,692,214     $ 1,652,934       $      (39,280)

Capital Investment Vote by Program
1    Ministry Support Services
1.3 Corporate Services                                          25             -                400                 425               312             (113)
2    Mental Health and Addiction
2.5 Treatment and Recovery                               5,000                 -                 600            5,600                 955           (4,645)
                                                         5,025                 -               1,000            6,025               1,267           (4,758)
                                                  $      5,025       $         -     $         1,000   $        6,025     $         1,267   $       (4,758)
Contingency Vote by Program
2   Mental Health and Addiction
2.5 Treatment and Recovery - Capital Investment             -                  -           4,000                4,000              1,772            (2,228)
2.8 Mental Health and Addiction Services                    -                  -          33,160               33,160             33,160               -
                                                            -                  -          37,160               37,160             34,932    $       (2,228)

Total                                             $ 1,559,737        $     137,502   $    38,160       $    1,735,399     $ 1,689,133       $      (46,266)
Lapse/(Encumbrance)                                                                                                                         $      (46,266)




(1) As per “Expense Vote by Program” and “Capital Investment Vote by Program” page 165 of the 2024-25 Government

      Estimates.
(2) Per the Supplementary Supply Estimates approved on March 20, 2025.

(3) Adjustments include supply vote transfers for "Contingency" as approved by the Lieutenant Governor in Council

  under the direction of the Minister of Finance. The Contingency supply vote consists of a provisional funding authority
  transferable to any ministry. Upon approval by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, the President of Treasury Board
  and Minister of Finance may either spend or transfer all or a portion of this supply vote to another Minister for public
  emergencies, disasters, or unanticipated costs.
(4) Actuals exclude non-voted amounts as no cash disbursement is required (non-cash amounts), or because the

  Legislative Assembly has already provided the funding authority pursuant to a statute other than an appropriation act.
  Non-cash amounts (such as amortization, accretion, valuation adjustments and other provisions) are excluded as these
  amounts do not require any expenditure or payment of public money. Year-end expense accruals & payables which will
  immediately require a cash outlay (payment of public money) to settle or otherwise extinguish the liabilities are
  included in Actuals.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                 129
Financial Information



Deferred Contributions (unaudited)
Year ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)


                                                                       2025                   2024
                                                                                             Restated
Unspent deferred contributions
         Deferred operating contributions                         $        29,244       $           33,900
         Deferred capital contributions                                        14                     1,147
(1)
      Deferred contributions                                      $        29,258       $           35,047




(1) Deferred contributions consist primarily of federal government funding and contributions from other

      Government of Alberta entities.




130                                                        Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Financial Information




Annual Report Extracts and Other Statutory Reports

Public Interest Disclosure (Whistleblower Protection) Act


Section 32 of the Public Interest Disclosure (Whistleblower Protection) Act reads:

32(1) Every chief officer must prepare a report annually on all disclosures that have been made to
      the designated officer of the department, public entity or office of the Legislature for which
      the chief officer is responsible.

   (2) The report under subsection (1) must include the following information:

       (a) the number of disclosures received by the designated officer, the number of disclosures
          acted on and the number of disclosures not acted on by the designated officer;

       (b) the number of investigations commenced by the designated officer as a result of
          disclosures;

       (c) in the case of an investigation that results in a finding of wrongdoing, a description of the
           wrongdoing and any recommendations made or corrective measures taken in relation to
           the wrongdoing or the reasons why no corrective measure was taken.

   (3) The report under subsection (1) must be included in the annual report of the department,
       public entity or office of the Legislature if the annual report is made publicly available.

There were no disclosures of wrongdoing filed with my office for your department between
April 1, 2024, and March 31, 2025.




Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                   131
