           Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025   i

Classification: Protected A
Public Safety and Emergency Services, Government of Alberta | Public Safety and Emergency Services
Annual Report 2024 –2025

©2025 Government of Alberta | Published: June 2025
ISBN 978-1-4601-6301-6
ISSN 2817-4534

This publication is issued under the Open Government Licence – Alberta (http://open.alberta.ca/licence).

Note to Readers: Copies of the annual report are available on the Alberta Open Government Portal website
https://open.alberta.ca/publications/2817-4534



ii                                                Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                                                                  Introduction




Table of Contents
Preface ...................................................................................................................................................................... 3

Minister’s Accountability Statement ............................................................................................................ 4

Message from the Minister ............................................................................................................................... 5

Management’s Responsibility for Reporting ............................................................................................ 7

Results Analysis ................................................................................................................................................... 9
      Ministry Overview ......................................................................................................................................................... 10
      Discussion and Analysis of Results .................................................................................................................... 16
      Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology ..................................................................................... 42

Financial Information ........................................................................................................................................46
      Reporting Entity and Method Consolidation ................................................................................................... 47
      Ministry Financial Highlights ................................................................................................................................... 48
      Supplemental Financial Information ................................................................................................................... 52
      Other Financial Information ..................................................................................................................................... 53

Annual Report Extracts and Other Statutory Reports........................................................................60




Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                                    1
Introduction




2              Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                            Introduction




Preface
The Public Accounts of Alberta are prepared in accordance with the Financial Administration Act
and the Sustainable Fiscal Planning and Reporting Act. The Public Accounts consist of the annual
report of the Government of Alberta and the annual reports of each ministry.

The 2024-25 Annual Report reflects the 2024-27 Ministry business plans, the Government of
Alberta Strategic Plan, as well as the ministry’s activities and accomplishments during the 2024-25
fiscal year, which ended on March 31, 2025.

The Annual Report of the Government of Alberta contains Budget 2024 Key Results, the audited
Consolidated Financial Statements and Performance Results, which compares actual performance
results to desired results set out in the government’s strategic plan.

This annual report of the Ministry of Public Safety and Emergency Services contains the Minister’s
Accountability Statement, the ministry’s Financial Information and Results Analysis, a comparison
of actual performance results to desired results set out in the Ministry Business Plan. This ministry
annual report also includes:

   •    other financial information as required by the Financial Administration Act and Sustainable
        Fiscal Planning and Reporting Act, as separate reports, to the extent that the ministry has
        anything to report.

All Ministry Annual Reports should be considered along with the Government of Alberta Annual
Report to provide a complete overview of government’s commitment to openness, accountability,
and fiscal transparency.




Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                          3
Introduction




Minister’s Accountability Statement
The ministry’s annual report for the year ended March 31, 2025, was prepared under my direction
in accordance with the Sustainable Fiscal Planning and Reporting Act and the government’s
accounting policies. All the government’s policy decisions as at June 12, 2025 with material
economic or fiscal implications of which I am aware have been considered in the preparation of this
report.



[Original signed by]

Mike Ellis
Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Services




4                                             Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                              Introduction




Message from the Minister
                                     In 2024-25, the Ministry of Public Safety and Emergency Services
                                     remained focused on building safer, stronger communities across
                                     Alberta. Our work spanned the province—from tackling urban and
                                     rural crime and strengthening victims services, to preparing for
                                     wildfires and floods. Across every initiative, our approach centred
                                     on collaboration, innovation and resilience.

                                  Over the past year, our ministry took bold steps to respond to the
                                  growing complexity of public safety challenges. To tackle urban
                                  crime, we invested more than $18.4 million into Calgary and
                                  Edmonton through the Safe Streets Action Plan. This investment is
                                  supporting the deployment of 100 additional officers across both
                                  cities to strengthen visible enforcement, improve safety and
reduce social disorder in high-risk areas.

We also continued to support alternative policing models that reflect local needs and priorities.
This included $11.3 million in transition funding to help establish the new Grande Prairie Police
Service and $883,200 in ongoing support for Siksika Nation as it develops its own police service.
Through an additional $1.27 million in grant funding in 2024-25, we helped 18 communities—
including municipalities, First Nations and Metis Settlements—explore alternative policing and
community safety models.

Addressing rural crime continues to be a priority. Four new teams of Alberta Sheriffs are helping
police disrupt crime in rural areas by gathering intelligence and evidence, and by apprehending
wanted fugitives. In 2024, the fugitive apprehension teams executed 2,156 warrants in over 39
municipalities. Over the past year, we also expanded the Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods
teams in Edmonton and Calgary, and created two new teams in Red Deer and Lethbridge. Since
2008, the Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods unit has investigated more than 10,000
properties, including drug houses and gang hideouts.

With an additional $10 million investment, we also expanded the RAPID Response program to
boost visibility and improve response times in rural communities. At the same time, we
strengthened intelligence-led enforcement strategies by committing $55.7 million to the Alberta
Law Enforcement Response Teams (ALERT) to disrupt organized crime through a coordinated and
collaborative approach.

Recognizing the importance of border and transportation security, we announced $29 million in
December 2024 to create and expand the Alberta Sheriffs Interdiction Patrol Team (IPT). This
specialized team is tasked with disrupting illegal cross-border activity, particularly along the
Alberta-Montana border and major east-west transport routes.

In addition to strengthening frontline enforcement, we also took steps to modernize how Alberta
monitors high-risk individuals in the community. Earlier this year, our ministry launched a new
electronic monitoring program for adults on bail or serving community-based sentences who are
identified by the courts as posing a potential risk. Enabled by recent amendments to the Corrections
Act and Corrections Regulation, the program uses ankle bracelet technology to track compliance
with court-ordered conditions.

Also, in our correctional system, we expanded therapeutic living units in four facilities and
introduced new transitional services in five others to better support successful reintegration. These



Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                          5
Introduction




initiatives help individuals build the skills and stability needed to break the cycle of addiction, crime
and incarceration.

Supporting victims of crime also remained central to our efforts. This year marked the full
implementation of a new regional model for police-based victim services, backed by a $25.7 million
investment to improve access and consistency across the province. Another $8.1 million helped
ensure victims of serious crime can access psychological supports and extended medical benefits.

Alberta also took major steps to combat human trafficking. We provided $2.5 million to the Alberta
Centre to End Trafficking in Persons (AC), which is an independent hub for system coordination
and survivor support. Through the Combatting Trafficking in Persons Grant, 19 organizations
received a total of $5.5 million in funding. The grant program, which was developed in partnership
with the AC, focuses on prevention, protection and the empowerment of victims and survivors, with
priority given to Indigenous- and survivor-led initiatives. Funding was balanced across Calgary,
Edmonton and rural Alberta, and approximately 40 per cent of total funding directed to Indigenous-
led or serving organizations.

The ministry also continued to work with other government partners in advancing a multi-platform
approach to address hate motivated crimes and incidents in the province. We provided $2.13
million in grant funding to 95 groups across Alberta, including schools, places of worship and
community-based service providers for security assessments, security infrastructure
improvements, training, equipment and immediate security response measures.

In the summer, wildfires prompted evacuations from a wide variety of communities, including the
Municipality of Jasper, the County of Grande Prairie, the Municipal District of Greenview, the
Regional Municipality of Wood Buffalo and Little Red River Cree Nation. The ministry allocated
nearly $158 million in disaster recovery funding to support several communities with the costs of
responding to these emergencies. We also provided training to nearly 19,300 local and municipal
staff in emergency management to help ensure we are ready for whatever comes next. The
legislative assembly also passed the Emergency Statutes Amendment Act, 2024, which ensures the
government has the legislated authority it needs to actively manage local emergencies in times
when additional provincial oversight and help is needed.

Public safety is a collective effort. Our accomplishments this year reflect the dedication of
thousands of Albertans who go above and beyond to keep our communities safe. I want to extend
my deepest thanks to them and to the team within the Ministry of Public Safety and Emergency
Services for their hard work and service.



[Original signed by]

Mike Ellis
Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Services




6                                                Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                            Introduction




Management’s Responsibility for Reporting
The Ministry of Public Safety and Emergency Services includes the Department of Public Safety and
Emergency Services and the Victims of Crime and Public Safety Fund.

The executives of the individual entities within the ministry have the primary responsibility and
accountability for the respective entities. Collectively, the executives ensure the ministry complies
with all relevant legislation, regulations and policies.

Ministry business plans, annual reports, performance results and the supporting management
information are integral to the government’s fiscal and strategic plan, annual report, quarterly
reports, and other financial and performance reporting.

Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the accompanying ministry financial information
and performance results for the ministry rests with the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency
Services. Under the direction of the Minister, I oversee the preparation of the ministry’s annual
report, which includes the financial information, performance results on all objectives and
initiatives identified in the Ministry Business Plan, and performance results for all ministry-
supported commitments that were included in the 2024-27 Government of Alberta Strategic Plan.
The financial information and performance results, out of necessity, include amounts that are based
on estimates and judgments. The financial information is prepared using the government’s stated
accounting policies, which are based on Canadian public sector accounting standards. The
performance measures are prepared in accordance with the following criteria:

   •    Reliable – information used in applying performance measure methodologies agrees with
        the underlying source data for the current and prior years’ results.

   •    Understandable – the performance measure methodologies and results are presented
        clearly.

   •    Comparable – the methodologies for performance measure preparation are applied
        consistently for the current and prior years’ results.

   •    Complete – outcomes, performance measures and related targets match those included in
        the ministry’s Budget 2024.

As Deputy Minister, in addition to program responsibilities, I am responsible for the ministry’s
financial administration and reporting functions. The ministry maintains systems of financial
management and internal control which gives consideration to costs, benefits, and risks that are
designed to:

   •    provide reasonable assurance that transactions are properly authorized, executed in
        accordance with prescribed legislation and regulations, and properly recorded so as to
        maintain accountability of public money;

   •    provide information to manage and report on performance;

   •    safeguard the assets and properties of the province under ministry administration;

   •    provide Executive Council, the President of Treasury Board and Minister of Finance, and the
        Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Services the information needed to fulfill their
        responsibilities; and



Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                          7
Introduction




    •    facilitate preparation of Ministry business plans and annual reports required under the
         Sustainable Fiscal Planning and Reporting Act.

In fulfilling my responsibilities for the ministry, I have relied, as necessary, on the executives of the
individual entities within the ministry.



[Original signed by]

Curtis Zablocki
Acting Deputy Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Services
June 12, 2025




8                                                 Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                                                          Results Analysis




Results Analysis
Table of Contents
   Ministry Overview..................................................................................................................................... 10
         Organizational Structure ................................................................................................................................ 11
         Operational Overview ...................................................................................................................................... 11
         Key Highlights ..................................................................................................................................................... 14
   Discussion and Analysis of Results ..................................................................................................... 16
         Actions that support the priorities of the Government of Alberta Strategic Plan................... 16
         Outcome One: Albertans are safe and secure......................................................................................... 17
         Outcome Two: Albertans are supported in their interactions with the justice system........ 28
         Outcome Three: Alberta is prepared and resilient to the impacts of disasters ....................... 34
   Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology ...................................................................... 42




Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                                     9
Results Analysis




Ministry Overview
Public Safety and Emergency Services (PSES) is committed to keeping Albertans safe and secure,
and ensuring Alberta is prepared for and resilient to the impacts of disasters. The ministry works
alongside partners in law enforcement, justice, health, social services, Indigenous communities, and
other community-based organizations as a part of the justice and public safety continuum to
support the unique needs of Albertans, while ensuring the sustainability and resilience of the
system.

PSES provides provincial policing services through an agreement with the federal government that
establishes the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) as the provincial police service and
supports municipal policing through policing grants. The ministry supports specialized policing,
such as the Alberta Law Enforcement Response Teams (ALERT), which work to combat organized
and serious crime, and investigate drug trafficking, child exploitation, human trafficking, and gang
violence. The Sheriff Interdiction Patrol Team is strengthening the province’s ability to secure its
section of Canada's border with the United States and ensuring illegal attempts to cross the border
or smuggle drugs and firearms are dealt with in a timely and appropriate manner.

The ministry is responsible for the development of policing standards and the oversight of police,
public security services and peace officers. It is also working to establish a new independent agency
police service to assume policing functions performed by and planned for the Alberta Sheriffs to
enhance the safety of Alberta communities. Additionally, the Public Security Indigenous Advisory
Committee is advising government on policing matters affecting Indigenous people within their
communities.

With eight provincial adult correctional centres, two provincial youth correctional centres, and over
40 probation offices across the province, the ministry is responsible for the custody and
supervision of adults and young persons under correctional authority, as well as the facilitation of
rehabilitation opportunities. The ministry also contracts with local Indigenous communities to
provide community supervision of clients living within those communities. The ministry strives to
help its correctional services clients make positive, sustainable and lawful choices.

PSES ensures the delivery of programs and services to support victims of crime, including those
affected by domestic violence and human trafficking. The ministry also provides grant funding for
crime prevention, youth diversion and community safety programs, including programs that focus
on youth who are at high risk of becoming involved in gang and criminal activity.

The ministry leads the coordination, collaboration and cooperation of organizations involved in the
prevention of, response to, and recovery from emergencies in the province. PSES provides direct
emergency management support and advice to municipalities and Métis Settlements, as well as
Alberta’s First Nations through an agreement with the Government of Canada to help those
communities manage emergencies and disasters effectively.

PSES continues to support the unique needs of Albertans involved in the criminal justice system.
The ministry collaborates with the Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction and other partners to
support a recovery-oriented system of care that provides access to a full continuum of services,
including services that support mental health and addictions recovery. Therapeutic living units and
transitional services are operational in Alberta correctional facilities.




10                                             Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



Organizational Structure




Operational Overview
Public Safety and Emergency Services
Public Security Division

Public Security works to ensure that Albertans live in safe and secure communities by managing
and delivering a series of programs and services, including managing the provincial policing
contract with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police; overseeing integrated and specialized policing
initiatives; pursuing forfeiture of proceeds of crime; regulating the civil enforcement industry,
security services and investigators and the peace officer program; delivering supplementary law
enforcement, including border patrol, court security, prisoner transport, traffic and commercial
vehicle safety enforcement; protecting officials and infrastructure; managing fish and wildlife
enforcement; providing oversight of police and police oversight bodies to improve the delivery of
police services; supporting municipalities and Indigenous communities interested in exploring
different models of policing and public safety; licensing private investigators and security guards;
providing security services for government buildings, employees, the judiciary, and members of
government; and working with public safety stakeholders to address hate motivated crime and
intimate partner violence.

Correctional Services Division

Correctional Services is responsible for the effective and efficient custody and supervision of adults
and young persons under provincial correctional authority, including the facilitation of
rehabilitation opportunities. Custody is for adults who are remanded or serving a sentence of less
than two years and for young persons who are remanded or sentenced. Community supervision


Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                         11
Results Analysis



includes programs such as pre-trial supervision, probation, and alternative measures/sanctions for
both adults and young persons.

The Training Academy provides induction training to Alberta’s peace officers, the Alberta Sheriffs
and community peace officers as authorized by the director of law enforcement under the Peace
Officer Act, and to Correctional Services. The Training Academy is accountable to establish
standards, and providing oversight to peace officer training programs, developing and delivering
training, and managing training facilities.

Alberta Emergency Management Agency

The Alberta Emergency Management Agency works with its partners to provide a province-wide
emergency management system that protects Albertans, their property, and the environment
against hazards. The agency coordinates the provincial response to large-scale emergencies and
disasters, assists with disaster response and recovery activities, and provides direct assistance to
local authorities when required. The agency also provides strategic policy direction and leadership
as the Government of Alberta’s emergency management coordinating agency and supports
preparedness through the provision of training and the Be Prepared program.

The agency actively contributes to enhancing Alberta’s emergency management system and assists
with the development of sustainable emergency management capabilities. It also facilitates the
delivery of provincial emergency social services and Alberta’s 911 program and supports the
Alberta First Responders Radio and Communications System. Additionally, the agency collaborates
with provincial, territorial, federal, and international stakeholders to promote a comprehensive
emergency management approach to enhance the safety of all Albertans.

Financial Services Division

Financial Services provides a full range of financial support functions for the ministry including
compliance, budgeting, auditing, facilities and fleet services, procurement, and planning. These
services are provided to establish and maintain strategic priorities and optimize operating
efficiency while ensuring division, ministry and Government of Alberta goals are aligned.

Strategy, Support and Integrated Initiatives Division

Strategy, Support and Integrated Initiatives supports policy and planning, stakeholder engagement,
strategic policy with legislative impacts, and the delivery of legislated business planning and
reporting requirements. The division provides expertise and strategic insights into the ministry’s
work through modernization and digitization, research, evaluation, data analytics, and strategic
reporting. The division delivers programs and grants to improve community and public safety and
support victims of crime, including the delivery of the Victims of Crime Assistance Program,
community-based crime prevention and diversion grants, and grants to combat trafficking in
persons. The division also partners with the Alberta Centre to End Trafficking in Persons and
provides services to families of missing and murdered Indigenous people through the Family
Information Liaison Unit. The division also provides agency oversight services for the ministry’s
agencies, boards and commissions.




12                                              Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



Agencies, Boards and Commissions
Alberta Parole Board
The Alberta Parole Board determines parole eligibility for people serving a sentence of less than
two years in provincial correctional facilities. The board has exclusive authority, in accordance with
legislated criteria, to determine whether to grant parole and is responsible for imposing conditions
on individuals released on parole. Each board member has specific knowledge of crime trends and
resources in their region. Board members are appointed through Order in Council.
Law Enforcement Review Board

The Law Enforcement Review Board, established under the Police Act, hears appeals from members
of the public and police officers who have complaints regarding the actions of police officers, or
who are unsatisfied with the disposition of their complaint by the responsible chief of police. The
board also hears appeals relating to peace officer employer authorizations or peace officer
appointments cancelled under the Peace Officer Act. Board members are appointed through Order
in Council.
Public Security Indigenous Advisory Committee
The Public Security Indigenous Advisory Committee is responsible for providing the Minister with
advice regarding public security matters, from an Indigenous perspective. The committee’s core
areas of focus are policing matters affecting Indigenous peoples within their communities. The
committee is comprised of diverse Indigenous perspectives from Treaty 6, 7 and 8, Métis Nations
and Métis Settlements, urban and rural communities. Committee members are appointed through
Ministerial Order.

Victims of Crime and Public Safety Programs Committee
The Victims of Crime and Public Safety Programs Committee evaluates grant applications from
eligible programs and makes recommendations to the Minister, based upon submitted grant
applications respecting programs that benefit victims of crime and public safety initiatives.
Committee members are appointed through Ministerial Order.
Independent Agency Police Service Oversight Board
The Independent Agency Police Service Oversight Board is a newly established board to oversee the
creation and operation of an independent agency police service, with a focus on civilian oversight,
transparency, and accountability. Board members are appointed through Ministerial Order.
Provincial Police Advisory Board
The Provincial Police Advisory Board is a body representing small and rural communities served by
the RCMP under the Provincial Police Service Agreement to make recommendations on province-
wide policing priorities. The sections of the Police Act establishing the Board came into force March
2025. Board members are appointed through Ministerial Order.

Police Review Commission
The Police Review Commission (PRC) will be an arm’s length agency responsible for receiving
complaints against police officers, carrying out investigations and conducting disciplinary hearings.
The PRC is intended to be in place for December 2025.




Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                       13
Results Analysis



Key Highlights
The Ministry of Public Safety and Emergency Services focused on accomplishing three outcomes
identified in the 2024-27 Ministry Business Plan:

     •   Albertans are safe and secure,

     •   Albertans are supported in their interactions with the justice system, and

     •   Alberta is prepared and resilient to the impacts of disasters.

Key highlights and results achieved by the Ministry of Public Safety and Emergency Services in
2024-25 include:

 Urban crime                Invested $18.4 million in provincial funding to the Calgary Police
 prevention                 Service and Edmonton Police Service to continue the implementation of
                            the Safe Streets Action Plan to address the challenges of crime, violence
                            and social disorder in Alberta’s major cities.
                            Calgary deployed 50 additional street-level police officers, and 32
                            police officers deployed in Edmonton with a plan for the additional 18
                            police officers to be deployed in 2025-26 to support urban crime
                            reduction and address social disorder through proactive community
                            engagement.

 Indigenous and             Awarded $1.27 million in grant funding to 18 communities, including
 Municipal Policing         municipalities, First Nations and Metis Settlements, to support
                            exploration of alternative policing and community safety models.
                            Provided $11.3 million in transition funding to support the creation of
                            the Grande Prairie Police Service to deliver effective and community-
                            focused policing services tailored to the needs of the city’s residents.
                            Continued support to the Siksika Nation to develop their self-
                            administered Indigenous police service to improve the safety and
                            security of individuals within the community.

 Strengthening rural        Provided over $376 million under the Provincial Police Service
 policing                   Agreement for RCMP services to ensure Albertans in small and rural
                            areas receive timely and effective law enforcement support.
                            Invested $10 million to continue to expand the Rural Alberta Province
                            Integrated Defence (RAPID) Response program to improve police
                            response times and increase visible law enforcement presence across
                            Alberta’s rural communities.

 Crime prevention           Provided $55.7 million to support the Alberta Law Enforcement
 initiatives                Response Teams (ALERT) to advance intelligence-led efforts to
                            dismantle organized crime and suppress gang-related violence.
                            Committed $28.6 million to establish the Alberta Sheriffs Interdiction
                            Patrol Teams to secure Alberta’s section of Canada's border with the
                            United States and to ensure illegal attempts to cross the border or
                            smuggle drugs and firearms are dealt with in a timely and appropriate
                            manner.




14                                               Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                            Results Analysis



                              Implemented the modern ankle bracelet electronic monitoring
                              program for adult correctional clients on bail or serving community-
                              based sentences who pose a potential risk as identified by the courts.

 Modernizing victim           Invested $25.7 million to support the provision of services to victims of
 services delivery            crime and implemented a new regional model for police-based victim
                              services to improve access and ensure consistent, regionally
                              coordinated services for victims of crime.
                              Allocated over $8.1 million to support victims of crime to access
                              immediate and longer-term psychological supports and extended
                              medical benefits for victims.

 Combatting trafficking       Provided $2.5 million to the Alberta Centre to End Trafficking in
 in persons                   Persons, established as an independent non-profit, to support
                              operations, lead system coordination, develop a provincial response
                              model, and advance implementation of the Reading Stone report
                              recommendations.
                              Provided $5.5 million in grant funding to 19 organizations through the
                              Combatting Trafficking in Persons Grant, with approximately 40 per
                              cent of funding supporting Indigenous-led or serving organizations.

 Protecting vulnerable        Provided over $2.1 million in grant funding to 95 organizations,
 Albertans, at risk of        including faith-based organizations, high-risk schools and community
 hate-motivated crime         organizations to inform prevention strategies and enhance responses
                              to hate, bias and prejudice in Alberta.

 Providing evidence-          Continued support to therapeutic living units in four correctional
 based correctional           facilities to assist individuals in custody with skills necessary to avoid
 interventions                reverting to substance use or criminal activity after their release to the
                              community.
                              Implemented transitional services in five correctional centres to
                              support inmates to access recovery supports and services.

 Improved emergency           Allocated nearly $158 million in disaster recovery funding for wildfire
 management measures          and flood relief efforts to support affected communities in their journey
                              towards recovery and rebuilding.
                              Engaged nearly 19,300 participants in emergency management
                              training sessions and supported approximately 2,400 learners through
                              the new emergency social services training to build resilience, ensure
                              readiness, and strengthen Alberta’s capacity to manage disaster
                              impacts.
                              Worked with volunteers to support search and rescue operations
                              involving 470 incidents and over 149,000 service hours, including
                              wildfire response and underwater search missions.


The Ministry of Public Safety and Emergency Services remains committed to regulatory approaches
and program delivery that reduces unnecessary government oversight and emphasizes outcomes to
improve access to government services, attract investment, support innovation and
competitiveness, and grow Alberta businesses.



Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                             15
Results Analysis




Discussion and Analysis of Results
Actions that support the priorities of the Government of Alberta Strategic Plan



 Key Priority Two: Investing in Albertans
 Objective: Accelerating mental health and addiction support

 Alberta’s government is supporting Albertans at risk of or experiencing addiction and mental
 health challenges in their pursuit of recovery. This recovery-oriented system of care provides
 access to a full continuum of personalized, community-based services and supports, from
 prevention and early intervention to treatment and recovery.

 For detailed reporting on supporting initiative, please refer to:

      •   Page 29 – Therapeutic Living Units and Transitional Services

 Objective: Strengthening safe and thriving communities

 Alberta’s government is taking action to address crime and social disorder to ensure that all
 Albertans feel safe and secure in their communities. Albertans also deserve an accessible and
 sustainable justice system that protects them and supports safer communities. Government will
 protect Albertans through focused work to reduce and prevent crime, support victims of crime,
 and make the justice system fairer, faster, and more effective. Government will work to address
 racism, including the systemic barriers facing racially marginalized and Indigenous peoples and
 communities, to help ensure all Albertans can reach their full social and economic potential.

 For detailed reporting on supporting initiatives, please refer to:

      •   Page 16 – Safe Streets Action Plan

      •   Page 16 – Alberta Law Enforcement Response Teams

      •   Page 19 – Combatting Trafficking in Persons

      •   Page 19 – Hate Crimes Coordination Unit and Hate Crime Community Liaisons

      •   Page 21 – Public Security Indigenous Advisory Committee

      •   Page 23 – Modern ankle bracelet electronic monitoring

      •   Page 31 – New Victim Service Delivery Model




16                                              Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Results Analysis



Outcome One: Albertans are safe and secure
Throughout 2024-25, PSES worked to ensure all Albertans are safe and secure in their
communities. The department led initiatives that support the vision of contemporary and
responsive policing that prioritizes the best interests of Alberta’s diverse populations. These
included focused work to address family and sexual violence, organized crime, hate-motivated
crime, and human trafficking to further enhance the safety of Alberta’s cities, communities and
families and protect those vulnerable to victimization.

Key Objectives

1.1   In partnership with police services, municipalities, and Indigenous communities,
      implement strategies to address crime and social disorder, particularly in urban
      centres and transit systems.

Safe Streets Action Plan

In 2024-25, the ministry continued to strengthen public safety in Alberta’s largest urban centres
through targeted investments and strategic partnerships with municipal police services. A total of
$18.4 million in provincial funding was allocated to the Calgary Police Service (CPS) and Edmonton
Police Service (EPS) to support the recruitment, training, and deployment of 50 new police officers.
These resources are dedicated to enhancing visible law enforcement presence and addressing
crime and social disorder in the downtown areas of Calgary and Edmonton. Of the total investment,
$10 million was provided to Calgary and $8.4 million to Edmonton.

In Edmonton, the ministry supported enhanced collaboration between the Transit Community
Safety (TRACS) unit and the Edmonton Transit System peace officers. Together, proactive strategies
to improve public safety in transit spaces were implemented. This included the development of an
information-sharing framework and use of tools such as the Transit Centre Event Dashboard, which
enables data-driven deployment of resources and targeted interventions at high-risk locations.
These efforts contributed to a safer, more inclusive rider experience for Edmonton’s transit users.
Thirty-two officers were assigned to TRACS in 2024-25 while the additional 18 officers will be
assigned in 2025-26.

In Calgary, through provincial grant funding, the Community Engagement Response Teams (CERT)
expanded with the deployment of 50 new uniformed patrol officers in 2024-25. These teams focus
on high-priority areas experiencing social disorder, including encampments, and integrate
enforcement with compassionate outreach to support vulnerable populations. CERT’s high-
visibility presence helps deter crime, promote public safety, and foster greater trust between law
enforcement and the communities they serve.

1.2   Continue to work with public safety stakeholders to address serious and organized
      crime by implementing risk reduction strategies, such as increased border support to
      keep crime out of Alberta. This includes work to establish the Alberta Office to Combat
      Trafficking in Persons (AOCTIP) and focused work on rural crime, hate-motivated
      crime, firearms violence, drug and human trafficking and proceeds of crime.

Alberta Law Enforcement Response Teams

In 2024-25, the ministry provided $55.7 million to support the continued operations of the Alberta
Law Enforcement Response Teams (ALERT) to dismantle and disrupt crime in the province through
a coordinated and collaborative approach. This funding supported a range of integrated and
intelligence-led enforcement initiatives, including organized crime and gang-related violence
throughout the province. ALERT’s coordinated efforts continue to play a critical role in enhancing


Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                     17
Results Analysis



public safety, safeguarding communities, and addressing the evolving complexity of serious and
violent crime.

The Integrated Gang Enforcement Team (IGET),
operating under ALERT’s Combined Forces Special
Enforcement Unit, is focusing on the province’s most       Quick facts:
violent gang offenders. Through coordinated
enforcement strategies, IGET continued to                  2024-25 ALERT statistics:
proactively respond to gang violence, support
intelligence-sharing among law enforcement                     Number of Internet Child
partners, and increase police presence in gang-                                                      4,582
                                                               Exploitation cases handled
impacted communities. In addition, ALERT
continued to fund and support specialized units                Number of children rescued from
                                                                                                       137
such as the Firearms Investigative Unit (FIU) and              sexual abuse and/or luring
Gang and Violence Suppression Teams in Edmonton
and Calgary. The FIU, formed in 2019 by Edmonton               Number of charges laid                1,498
Police Service and supported by ALERT, investigates
and disrupts firearm-related offences tied to                  Number of people arrested for
                                                                                                       150
criminal networks, including illegal possession,               organized crime-related activities
trafficking, and manufacturing of firearms and
prohibited devices. In addition, the Gang and                  Number of firearms seized               105
Violence Suppression Teams continued to focus on
proactively identifying individuals at risk of
involvement in gun violence and assisting in               In addition:
suppressing gang-related firearm offences.                 •     over $8.8 million worth of drugs
                                                                 seized; and
These integrated teams contributed to multiple
successful enforcement actions and continue to        • nearly $1.8 million worth of stolen
provide a critical frontline response to gun and gang   vehicles, farming equipment and
violence in Alberta. In 2024-25, ALERT seized over      property seized.
$8.83 million worth of harmful drugs from
communities across Alberta and approximately $500,000 in proceeds of crime.

Sheriffs Interdiction Patrol Teams

In December 2024, the Government of Alberta announced $28.6 million in funding to support the
creation and expansion of the Alberta Sheriffs Interdiction Patrol Teams aimed at disrupting illegal
cross-border activity, particularly along the Alberta-Montana border and major east-west
interprovincial transport routes. The investment is part of a broader commitment to enhance
Alberta’s response to the trafficking of deadly drugs and illegal firearms, and to strengthen border
security measures in coordination with provincial and federal enforcement agencies. The funding
also supports increased capacity for the Anti-Fentanyl and Illegal Gun Trafficking Implementation
Team to investigate and prevent the unlawful use and distribution of fentanyl and firearms in
Alberta. In January 2025, the first IPT unit comprised of members of the Alberta Sheriffs, was
deployed and began coordinated patrols alongside RCMP federal policing, RCMP K-Division, and the
Canada Border Services Agency. These integrated patrols focus on enhancing Alberta’s ability to
detect, intercept, and respond to illegal border activity in real time. Full operational readiness of the
Alberta Sheriffs Interdiction Patrol Teams is expected to be achieved in 2025-26.

Fugitive Apprehension Sheriff Support Team (FASST)

Since becoming operational in February 2024, FASST has contributed meaningfully to public safety
by working with police partners to remove high-risk, wanted individuals from Alberta
communities. In 2024-25, standard operating procedures and memoranda of understanding were


18                                               Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                             Results Analysis



formalized with key police partners, including the RCMP, the Medicine Hat Police Service, the
Lethbridge Police Service, the Edmonton Police Service (EPS), and the Calgary Police Service (CPS).
These agreements have strengthened operational coordination and clarified roles and
responsibilities across agencies. During the reporting period, two joint forces operations were
successfully led by the RCMP in collaboration with EPS and CPS. These operations resulted in the
execution of 2,156 warrants and the arrest of 397 Tier 1 fugitives in 39 jurisdictions across the
province. Tier 1 fugitives are defined as individuals who have caused harm to others, pose an
elevated risk to public safety, or have a criminal history involving straight indictable offences under
the Criminal Code. Work is ongoing to enhance operational effectiveness, including efforts to expand
inter-agency collaboration and refine stakeholder engagement strategies to support improved
safety outcomes for all Albertans.

Sheriff Investigative Support Unit (SISU)

In 2024-25, SISU expanded its operations through two new program concepts aimed at enhancing
law enforcement capacity in Alberta. Sixteen additional SISU members were deployed with a
dedicated rural crime mandate, while a second initiative embedded the 16-member team within
ALERT, supported by dedicated operational funding. SISU provided surveillance support to 141
                                                      cases province-wide, with the majority linked
                                                      to drug trafficking and organized crime.
   Quick facts:                                       Additional investigations supported included
                                                      child exploitation, homicide, prolific and sex
   2024 Sheriffs Highway Patrol (SHP) statistics:     offenders, human trafficking, guns and gang’s
                                                      activity, and auto theft. SISU continued to
                                                      work closely with ALERT, the Edmonton
    Number of tickets issued              58,592      Police Service, the Calgary Police Service, the
                                                      Royal Canadian Mounted Police, and other
    Number of impaired drivers                        government stakeholders to increase capacity
    apprehended (including Criminal        1,429      for evidence gathering and advancing
    Code charges)                                     enforcement outcomes. Each SISU operation
                                                      often targets multiple individuals involved in
    Number of Criminal Code charges          284      criminal activities, resulting in arrests and
                                                      improved safety outcomes across rural
    Number of impaired-related                        Alberta.
                                              59
   Criminal Code charges
   Number of vehicles seized from                                Rural Alberta Province Integrated Defence
                                                 1,672           (RAPID) Response
   impaired or suspended drivers

                                                         In 2024-25, the Government of Alberta
  Note: All impaired driving enforcement numbers         continued to advance the RAPID Response
  in the table are related to the RAPID Response         initiative, which is aimed at enhancing public
  initiative                                             safety in rural communities through stronger
                                                         integration of provincial peace officers. Under
this initiative, the Alberta Sheriffs have been granted expanded authorities to support the RCMP in
responding to calls for service and conducting Criminal Code investigations. The initiative equips
members of the Fish and Wildlife Enforcement Services and Sheriff Highway Patrol (SHP) with the
training, resources, and authority needed to provide timely and effective support in rural policing.
In 2024-25, $10 million was allocated in operational investments to support the continued rollout
of the RAPID Response program. These funds were used for training programs, purchase of
frontline equipment, and enhanced operational capacity among participating sheriff units. The
program is on track for full implementation in 2025-26, with SHP members expected to be fully
equipped with carbine rifles and hard body armour to enhance officer safety and preparedness in
higher-risk situations. This work complements broader efforts to improve police response times
and increase visible law enforcement presence across Alberta’s rural communities.


Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                            19
Results Analysis



Provincial Police Service Agreement

In 2024-25, government provided $376.7 million under the Provincial Police Service Agreement
(PPSA) to provide RCMP services in Alberta small and rural communities. This funding supported
nearly 1,700 RCMP officers and civilian staff to provide frontline patrols and specialized units
targeting organized crime and theft. These investments aim to strengthen community safety,
reduce response times, and ensure that Alberta small and rural areas receive timely and effective
law enforcement support.

Actions to Combat Hate Crimes

The ministry continues to work with other Government of Alberta partners in advancing a multi-
platform approach to address hate motivated crimes and incidents in the province. Since 2021, the
Alberta Security Infrastructure Program (ASIP) has allocated more than $5 million to support not-
for-profit organizations in strengthening their capacity to prevent and respond to hate and bias-
motivated violence. In 2024-25, ASIP provided over $2.13 million to 95 initiatives which included
physical security enhancements, the temporary deployment of security personnel, and the delivery
of training to staff and volunteers, supporting safer, more inclusive environments across Alberta
communities.

In December 2023, eligibility for the ASIP grant was temporarily expanded to include Islamic and
Jewish faith-based alternative schools, as well as Arabic bilingual programs. Due to global conflict,
these schools were identified as being at heightened risk of experiencing hate or bias motivated
violence. This expansion to eligible schools remains in effect until December 31, 2025. More than
$670,000 of the total ASIP funding awarded in 2024-25 was awarded to 19 schools under this
temporary expansion. One grant, provided to the Edmonton Public School Board, consolidated
available funding for eight eligible schools, reducing administrative burden and allowing the school
division to improve purchasing efficiency for security enhancements and optimize safety outcomes
for vulnerable students, staff, and school communities.

Ongoing outreach and engagement with community organizations, law enforcement agencies, and
faith-based groups contributed to a broader awareness of ASIP and an increase in applications from
a more diverse set of applicants, including shelter spaces, youth centres, and community leagues. In
a survey of past ASIP recipients, 40 of the 42 respondents indicated that the funding was effective
in improving safety, and many also reported increased feelings of security and reduced anxiety for
those accessing their spaces. These findings affirm the government’s commitment to community
resilience and safety across Alberta.

In 2024-25, the PSES Hate Crime Coordination Unit (HCCU) continued to work closely with law
enforcement and community stakeholders to promote investigation, prevention, and public
education. The team is engaged with youth and Indigenous stakeholders, including partnerships
with a rural southern Alberta school board to support anti-bullying and leadership programming.
Two Hate Crime Community Liaisons (HCCLs) appointed in May 2022 completed their work which
led to a series of recommendations submitted to government following broad engagement with
stakeholders across sectors. Government is reviewing the recommendations, which will inform
future government initiatives to address hate crime in Alberta. In 2024-25, approximately $7,500
was allocated to support HCCL honoraria and travel expenses.

Combatting Human Trafficking

In 2024, the Alberta Office to Combat Trafficking in Persons was renamed the Alberta Centre to End
Trafficking in Persons (AC) and began operations as an independent non-profit entity. The AC is the
ministry’s partner in leading the fight to end human trafficking in Alberta. The AC received $2
million in 2024-25 to support operations, lead system coordination, develop a provincial response


20                                             Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis



model, and advance implementation of the Reading Stone report recommendations. The AC
officially unveiled its branding and website on February 22, 2025, National Human Trafficking
Awareness Day. The organization has established a board, recruited co-CEOs, and launched both an
operational advisory committee and a national Lived Experience Advisory Network to guide its
work.

In 2024-25, the ministry provided $5.5 million in funding to 19 organizations through the first
intake of the Combatting Trafficking in Persons (CTIP) Grant. Funding also supports province-wide
engagement and model development for the AC. The grant program, which was developed in
partnership with the AC, focuses on prevention, protection, and the empowerment of victims and
survivors, with priority given to Indigenous- and survivor-led initiatives. Funding was balanced
across Calgary, Edmonton, and rural Alberta, and approximately 40 percent of total funding was
directed to Indigenous-led or serving organizations. This approach supports relationship-building
with Indigenous communities and addresses community-specific needs through culturally
appropriate responses.

Through CTIP funding, 19 rapid exit and transitional beds will be added across the province to
provide immediate safety and access to services for individuals exiting trafficking situations.
Community partners and ALERT’s human trafficking teams have consistently identified the lack of
emergency housing as the most significant barrier victims face. These additional beds are expected
to reduce that gap and enhance long-term recovery outcomes.

The CTIP funding also supports law enforcement capacity. The ALERT Safety Network Coordinator
program will expand from four to six Safety Network Coordinators with new Safety Network
Coordinators stationed in Grande Prairie and Tsuut’ina Nation to align with rural and Indigenous
policing priorities. The expansion will ensure victims and survivors receive support throughout the
investigative process. As part of the broader grant program, the AC will develop an evaluation
framework and coordinated community response model. These efforts will support consistent data
collection and improve measurement of grant outcomes. Reporting from recipients will begin in
2025-26, with ongoing assessment to support ministry efforts to ensure Albertans are safe and
secure.

Gun and Gang Violence Action Fund

Through the Gun and Gang Violence Action Fund (GGVAF), the ministry continues to support law
enforcement, municipalities and community organizations to prevent, disrupt and increase
awareness of gun and gang violence. In 2023, the federal government announced a $390 million,
five-year extension of its GGVAF that provides funding to provinces and territories to strengthen
law enforcement and prevention programs. Alberta’s share of this funding amounts to $53.03
million. In 2024-25, Alberta provided $12.6 million in GGVAF funds to support key initiatives across
municipality, community and law enforcement groups, including:

   •    $4.1 million to the CPS, the EPS and the Camrose Police Service to address gun and gang
        violence, including for the Strategic Data Integration and Intelligence Team, a firearms
        compliance unit, and hiring a gang intelligence analyst.

   •    $5.2 million to fund projects within the Government of Alberta, including $1.7 million for a
        firearms prosecution team within Alberta Justice, and $1.1 million for the Correctional
        Services Division to hire intelligence analysts and officers within provincial correctional
        facilities.

   •    $3.3 million in grants and support to community groups focused on gang prevention and
        gang exit programs for at-risk youth and individuals recently released from correctional
        facilities.


Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                      21
Results Analysis



Alberta Crime Prevention Grant

The Alberta Crime Prevention grant is funded from the proceeds of property forfeited under
Alberta’s Civil Forfeiture Act. Civil forfeiture makes Alberta communities safer by taking away
property linked to crime, such as cash, vehicles and real estate. In 2024-25, the ministry awarded
approximately $2.38 million to 19 community-based organizations to support a variety of eligible
projects and initiatives. A list of recipients and their funded projects can be found here: Alberta Civil
Forfeiture Community Grant Funding (2022-2024).

Public Security Indigenous Advisory Committee (PSIAC)

The Government of Alberta continued to strengthen collaboration with Indigenous peoples to
ensure public safety programs and initiatives reflect the priorities of Indigenous communities. The
committee’s mandate has recently been refocused specifically on policing matters affecting
Indigenous peoples within their communities. The committee is composed of diverse Indigenous
perspectives from Treaty 6, 7 and 8, Métis Nations and Métis Settlements, urban and rural
communities. Approximately $24,000 was allocated in 2024-25 to support committee operations,
including honoraria, travel, and hosting costs. The committee remains a key mechanism for
ensuring culturally informed, community-driven approaches to public safety and policing in
Indigenous contexts.

Community-led Crime Prevention

The ministry continued to invest in citizen-led crime prevention efforts through targeted grant
funding to Alberta’s three provincial community crime prevention associations: the Alberta
Community Crime Prevention Association, the Alberta Provincial Rural Crime Watch Association,
and the Alberta Citizens on Patrol Association. These grants directly support the department’s
commitment to improving community safety by enhancing local capacity in rural and municipal
areas through grassroots crime prevention initiatives. Total funding available to the three
associations increased from nearly $363,000 to $478,000 in 2024-25, provided in March 2024 to
support timely planning and implementation of programs across Alberta. In addition to funding, the
department engages regularly with each association to strengthen alignment amongst community-
based initiatives and provincial public safety goals. The three organizations meet quarterly with
department staff and the RCMP’s Community Safety and Well-being Branch to discuss emerging
trends, share local insights, and coordinate strategies to enhance public safety outcomes. These
ongoing collaborations reinforce the province’s commitment to community-led solutions and the
vital role that local volunteers and crime prevention advocates play in keeping Alberta’s
communities safe.

1.3   Continue to improve the delivery of policing services in the province to ensure
      Albertans are safe and police are accountable to the communities they serve, including
      working with the Alberta Sheriffs and further investment in Indigenous policing
      programs.

Independent Agency Police Service

The Public Safety Statutes Amendment Act, 2024 received Royal Assent in May 2024, advancing
government priorities to better protect Albertans. One key aspect of the legislation was to respond
to the evolving public safety needs of Alberta’s communities by enabling the creation of a new
independent agency police service (IAPS). The IAPS is anticipated to assume policing
responsibilities currently carried out by the Alberta Sheriffs, who have taken on increasingly
complex, police-like roles in recent decades. This change to having policing roles carried out by
police officers under the authority of the Police Act, rather than being conducted by peace officers
under the Peace Officer Act, aligns with best practices for police work and would result in more


22                                               Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



transparency and accountability for the public. In November 2024, the Minister appointed
members to the IAPS oversight board to begin the work of operationalizing the service. Initial
priorities include the recruitment of a Chief of the IAPS and the development of governance and
operational frameworks in accordance with legislative direction. Work to establish IAPS as a fully
functioning police agency is ongoing and will continue into 2025-26 as part of the government’s
commitment to modernize law enforcement in Alberta.

Implementation of Mandatory Body Worn Cameras

In preparation for the province-wide implementation of body-worn cameras (BWCs) across all
police services in 2025-26, PSES worked closely with the Alberta Association of Chiefs of Police to
update provincial policing standards in September 2024 and advance a coordinated procurement
approach. In May 2024, in collaboration with the Ministry of Technology and Innovation, a
negotiated request for proposal was developed to acquire BWCs, In-Car Digital Video (ICDV)
systems, and a digital evidence management system. Following a competitive bid process, a vendor
was identified, and contract negotiations began. The province-wide implementation of BWCs will
ensure digital evidence management across all Alberta police services, in alignment with the
government’s commitment to enhancing public trust, accountability, and transparency in law
enforcement practices.

Police Review Commission

The Police Amendment Act, 2022, which received Royal Assent in December 2022, provides a
modernized framework for police complaints oversight. Key reforms include five standardized
complaint categories and the creation of the Police Review Commission (PRC), an arm’s length
agency responsible for receiving, assessing, investigating, and resolving complaints against police.
The Alberta Serious Incident Response Team (ASIRT) will be integrated into the PRC and continue
to lead investigations of a serious or sensitive nature, with an expanded mandate to include the
Alberta Sheriffs, other designated peace officers and legislative security officers. The PRC is
expected to become operational in December 2025. Following the creation of a dedicated
implementation team in 2023-24, efforts in the past year have focused on legislative and regulatory
development, community and stakeholder engagement, organizational design, staffing, branding,
procurement of training and technology, change management with police services, and securing
office space. Operational costs for the implementation team in 2024-2025 totaled $3.6 million.

Police Governance Regulation

In 2024-25, the Police Governance Regulation and Police Governance (Ministerial) Regulation were
developed to expand on the roles, functions, and composition of RCMP governance bodies
mandated by the Police Amendment Act, 2022, including the Provincial Police Advisory Board
(PPAB) and municipal and regional policing committees. These new regulations were based on a
series of engagement sessions in early 2024, which provided perspectives on how the new
governance bodies can better support communities individual needs. The new regulations, as well
as the corresponding Police Act amendments, took effect on March 1, 2025. A transition period
allowed municipalities to pass and implement relevant bylaws for policing committees and
providing sufficient time to stand up the PPAB.

1.4   Support municipalities and Indigenous communities interested in exploring different
      models of policing and public safety.

City of Grande Prairie’s Transition to a Municipal Police Service

In March 2023, the City of Grande Prairie passed a resolution to establish a municipal police service.
The Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Services approved $9.7 million in transition funding to


Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                       23
Results Analysis



support the creation of the Grande Prairie Police Service (GPPS). Funding provided over 2023-24
and 2024-25 supported key transition activities including recruitment and salaries for 48 officers
and 13 civilian staff, procurement of 15 vehicles, initial information technology (IT) infrastructure,
training, and other operational requirements. The GPPS is expected to be fully operational by 2026-
27, with the capacity to deliver effective and community-focused policing services tailored to the
needs of Grande Prairie residents.

Indigenous and Municipal Police Transition Study Grant

The Indigenous and Municipal Police Transition Study Grant (IMPTSG) supports communities
exploring alternative policing and community safety models through one-time funding for
feasibility studies. Since the program’s inception, including 2024-25, IMPTSG has awarded
$2.4 million to support 37 applications to 35 municipalities, 23 First Nations, and five Métis
Settlements. In 2024-25, 18 grant recipients received approximately $1.27 million in total funding.
These included Smoky Lake County, Kee Tas Kee Now Tribal Council, the Municipal District of
Opportunity No. 17, the Town of Slave Lake, the City of Beaumont, Kikino Métis Settlement, Gift
Lake Métis Settlement, Dene Tha’ First Nation, Fort McKay First Nation, Athabasca Tribal Council,
the Town of Rocky Mountain House, the Town of Cochrane, Enoch Cree Nation, the Town of
Drayton Valley, the Métis Settlements General Council (MSGC), the Town of Two Hills, Town of
Peace River, and O’Chiese First Nation. The program helps communities identify safety models
tailored to local needs and priorities, contributing to the province’s goal of supporting responsive,
community-based policing and public safety solutions.

Siksika Nation Self-Administered First Nations Police Service

In June 2022, Siksika Nation presented a business case to establish a First Nation police service. A
Relationship Agreement and MOU were signed with the Government of Alberta in 2023 confirming
provincial support. Under the Chief ’s leadership, Siksika Nation is actively recruiting a Chief of
Police and police commission members, while ongoing collaboration between PSES and Siksika
Nation continue to guide progress. Over 2023-24 and 2024-25, the ministry provided $883,200 in
funding to support the initiative. In 2025-26, coordinated effort to advance the development of the
Siksika Nation police service will continue.

1.5   Implement a modern ankle bracelet electronic monitoring program to enhance the
      supervision of individuals under correctional jurisdiction.

In January 2025, the Government of Alberta launched a modernized electronic monitoring program
for adult clients on bail or serving community-based sentences who are identified by the courts as
posing a potential risk. Enabled by recent amendments to the Corrections Act and Corrections
Regulation, the program monitors compliance with court-ordered conditions through the use of
ankle bracelets. A central monitoring unit within the Correctional Services Division provides 24/7
oversight of electronic monitoring conditions in coordination with the supervision provided by
community-based probation officers. This integrated approach supports public safety by enhancing
real-time accountability and strengthening the enforcement of judicial orders. Implementation of
the program has been supported by ongoing engagement with law enforcement, justice system
partners, and other stakeholders to ensure operational readiness and responsiveness. This
collaborative foundation will support continued program success and inform future enhancements.
The program is being evaluated to assess its impact on public safety and identify opportunities for
improvement. Funding of $2.8 million was allocated in fiscal 2024-25 to support initial
implementation and operations.




24                                              Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                    Results Analysis



Performance Metric 1.a:
      Median time from intake to resolution of Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods
      (SCAN) complaints1


                          Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                  2024-25            2024-25
  2020-21            2021-22            2022-23             2023-24                Target             Actual


                                                                                                  119 days
  Not                Not
                                        92 days             170 days           89 days            (South
  Available          Available
                                                                                                  Only)2

This measure was introduced in the Public Safety and Emergency Services Business Plan for the
first time in 2024-25 to assess the timeliness and efficiency of the Alberta Sheriffs’ Safer
Communities and Neighbourhoods (SCAN) unit in disrupting illegal activities and improving public
safety.
In 2024-25, the median time from complaint intake to resolution was 119 days. This represents a
34 per cent increase from the 2024-25 target, but a 30 per cent decrease from the revised 2023-24
result of 170 days. The measure reflects the government’s commitment to protecting Albertans by
addressing problem properties associated with activities such as drug trafficking, prostitution, child
exploitation, and gang-related crime.

Since 2023, the Alberta Sheriffs have strengthened SCAN’s provincial capacity by adding 20 new
investigator positions, expanding staffing in Edmonton and Calgary, and establishing new units in
Lethbridge and Red Deer to serve southern Alberta. In 2024, SCAN received and accepted 951
complaints for investigation, up from 698 in 2023, a figure expected to increase as public
awareness and community engagement grow.
The time required to resolve complaints varies based on several factors. Investigations involving
community safety orders may take up to three years to resolve due to the complexity and need to
uphold investigative quality, especially when case statuses shift between active and inactive.




1 Targets for this metric were initially set as follows: 89 days for 2024-25, 87 days for 2025-26, and 84 days

for 2026-27 based on the analysis of a two-month dataset informed by limited system capability at the time,
which introduced some inaccuracies in the results for the baseline and the targets set for the three-year
period. The methodology was refined to capture a full-year dataset for analysis using a new, more robust
records management system that accounts for all files. The current methodology offers better confidence in
the baseline and reported results. The ministry is also working on a new version of the Alberta Public
Security Application record management system with an improved search capability to significantly minimize
search errors and improve the integrity and accuracy of the data.

2 Only data from the provincial south region has been included in the calculation of the 2024-25 actual result

due to a data entry issue in the northern region, which significantly affected the reliability of the results. The
ministry has since implemented enhanced data validation protocols, provided targeted training to regional
staff responsible for data entry, and introduced an additional review step in the reporting process to ensure
data accuracy and to prevent similar issues from occurring in future reporting cycles.



Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                   25
Results Analysis



Additionally, timelines can be affected by the scheduling and duration of court and residential
tenancy dispute resolution service hearings, which fall outside SCAN’s control.
The nature of complaints also influences resolution timelines. While some files are straightforward,
others require extensive investigative work, including surveillance, evidence collection, and
coordination with law enforcement partners.
To ensure SCAN continues to meet the needs of Albertans, the ministry is maintaining support for
investigative operations by funding new positions, expanding its regional presence through
permanent offices in Lethbridge and Red Deer, and enhancing collaboration with the RCMP and
municipal police services in central Alberta to disrupt drug houses and support broader criminal
investigations.

This performance measure will provide ongoing insight into the SCAN unit’s ability to respond to
community concerns and contribute to safer, more secure neighbourhoods across Alberta.

Performance Indicator 1.a:
     Violent and Property Crime Rates per 100,000 population

                                             2019         2020          2021          2022          2023

  Alberta Violent Crime Rate                 1,462        1,455         1,519         1,561         1,591

  Rural                                      2,243        2,410         2,470         2,539         2,551

  Urban                                      1,291        1,246         1,312         1,352         1,392

  Alberta Property Crime Rate                5,894        5,070         4,599         5,061         4,752

  Rural                                      7,441        6,843         6,416         6,786         6,673

  Urban                                      5,545        4,674         4,197         4,685         4,349
*Data has been revised by the Canadian Centre for Justice and Community Safety Statistics since the
2024-27 business plan’s publication.

Crime rate measures the volume of crime, including all Criminal Code violations (except traffic)
relative to population size and is shown as urban and rural results. Violent crime includes homicide,
attempted murder, robbery, abduction and various forms of sexual assault. It does not include
traffic incidents that result in death or bodily harm.

Violent Crime Rate

In 2023, Alberta saw a small increase in violent crime. The overall rate went up by 1.9 per cent
compared to the year before. Urban Alberta had a three per cent increase, while rural areas had a
slight increase of 0.5 per cent. Most of the increase was due to a rise in extortion cases, which went
up by 25.7 per cent. However, some serious crimes dropped. Attempted murder went down by 14
per cent, firearm-related incidents reduced by nearly one per cent, and abductions decreased by 2
per cent. These crimes were the main drivers of violent crime in the previous year.

Property Crime Rate

In 2023, property crime in Alberta went down by 6.1 per cent overall. Rural areas saw a drop of 1.7
per cent, while urban areas had a larger decrease of 7.2 per cent. Compared to 2019, property crime


26                                              Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                              Results Analysis



is down 19.4 per cent across the province: 22 per cent lower in urban areas and 10 per cent lower
in rural communities. The decrease in 2023 was mainly due to fewer cases of trafficking in stolen
property (down 13 per cent), identity fraud (down 2.2 per cent), and identity theft (down 9.5 per
cent).

Performance Indicator 1.b:
      Violent and Non-violent Crime Severity Index3



              Violent Crime Severity Index                                  Non-Violent Crime Security Index
                                                                 124
              110           114         114        114
   108                                                                        108
                                              99         99                                             103          99
                                   93                                                        97
         90         88
                                                                       76                                                 74
                                                                                    69             68         71




     2019      2020           2021        2022      2023          2019          2020          2021       2022         2023

                         Alberta     Canada                                              Alberta     Canada


Source: Uniform Crime Reporting Survey, Canadian Centre for Justice and Community Safety
Statistics (CCJCSS). Data is available annually. CCJCSS Table data was available in July 2024.

The Crime Severity Index (CSI) measures the volume and severity of police-reported crime in
Canada. It has a base index value of 100 for 2006. The Violent CSI measures the overall volume and
severity of violent crime. Non-violent crime involves all police-reported property violations, other
Criminal Code violations, Criminal Code traffic violations and other federal statute violations.

The ministry continues to act on a number of fronts as part of its commitment to reduce crime,
including implementing RAPID Response, increasing funding to ALERT, hiring additional
investigators to support Alberta’s SCAN units, increasing police resources in high crime city centres,
creating dedicated border patrol teams, and supporting initiatives to combat hate crimes and
human trafficking. These initiatives are ensuring that Albertans are better protected from criminals
wherever they are in the province.

Overall Crime Severity Index (CSI)

In 2023, Canada’s CSI rose by 2.2 per cent, mainly due to increase in non-violent crimes. While 10 of
13 provinces and territories saw increases, Alberta’s CSI dropped by 2.1 per cent. Calgary and Red
Deer saw notable decreases of 8.5 per cent and 10.6 per cent, while Lethbridge and Edmonton




3 While this performance indicator is not included in the 2024-27 Public Safety and Emergency Services

Business Plan, it is being included in the Annual Report to provide additional context to reported crime
trends in the province.


Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                 27
Results Analysis



experienced increases of 6.9 per cent and 2.9 per cent. Alberta’s overall decline in CSI was driven by
decreases in property crimes and serious violent offences like attempted murder and child sexual
offences, though this was partly offset by increase in extortion and arson.

Violent Crime Severity Index

The national violent CSI was 99.4 in 2023, a 0.39 per cent increase over the 2022 index of 99, and
35 per cent higher than in 2013. Similarly, Alberta saw a slight increase of 0.27 per cent in the
Violent CSI in 2023 over the 2022 index as a result of the increase in extortion.

Non-violent Crime Severity Index

In 2023, the national non-violent CSI was 73.5, 3.1 per cent higher than in 2022. In 2023, Alberta’s
Non-violent CSI decreased by 3.2 per cent from the level in 2022. This was as a result of the declines
seen in most of the property crimes, including trafficking in stolen property, motor vehicle theft,
theft over and under $5,000, identity theft and identity fraud.

Outcome Two: Albertans are supported in their interactions with the justice system
The ministry continued to implement initiatives to modernize the delivery of correctional services,
including collaborating with Mental Health and Addiction on the implementation of a recovery-
oriented system of care that provides a network of community-based services that support those
with or at risk of alcohol, drug, or mental health issues. The implementation of a new victims
assistance program and a new victim services delivery model also ensure improved access and
consistent services for victims of crime.

Key Objectives

2.1   Work with municipalities, police services, community-based organizations, and other
      ministries to improve the alignment of mental health and addictions crisis response
      resources in community policing and corrections.

Correctional Services Delivery

The Correctional Services Division (CSD) is responsible for the supervision and care of adults and
young persons under provincial correctional jurisdiction. With operations spanning 10 adult and
youth correctional centres and more than 40 probation offices across Alberta, the division supports
client rehabilitation through the assessment of individual needs and risks. In partnership with
community organizations and service providers, CSD enables structured programming and
vocational training designed to equip individuals with the skills needed for successful community
reintegration. By being responsive and using evidence-based interventions, the ministry is working
to reduce recidivism and support positive, lawful behaviour. These efforts enhance public safety
and help build stronger, more resilient communities across the province. In 2024-25, the ministry
spent approximately $317.8 million in operating provincial correctional facilities and delivering
community supervision services to ensure the effective and accountable operation of Alberta’s
correctional system.

Integrated Offender Management Strategy

Through the Integrated Offender Management (IOM) program, the ministry continues to support a
person-centered approach to reducing recidivism by addressing the underlying factors that
contribute to criminal behaviour. In collaboration with Case Development Groups (CDGs) across
Alberta, the ministry advanced efforts in 2024-25 by enabling members of various law enforcement
agencies to assume facilitation roles within the program, strengthening coordination and


28                                              Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis



contributing to overall community safety. IOM operations expanded to include 20 RCMP
detachments, supported by monthly meetings across 14 CDGs, and 12 provincial IOM meetings
were held to align strategies with broader policing objectives and improve inter-agency
information-sharing. To enhance oversight and ensure consistency, the ministry initiated a
comprehensive review of IOM operations to standardize reporting metrics and evaluated four
secondee contracts to reinforce the program’s operational framework. These secondee contracts
represented a total
investment of $690,000
across participating law           Quick facts:
enforcement agencies. Moving
forward, the ministry will         2024-25 Correctional Services statistics:
continue to evaluate program
effectiveness, apply lessons        Total admissions into provincial adult custody      20,000
learned and pursue
opportunities to further
integrate IOM with                  Total releases from provincial adult custody        19,934
community safety partners
across Alberta, with the goal       Monthly average number of clients under
                                                                                        17,186
of reducing repeat offences         community supervision
and improving outcomes for
at-risk individuals.

Mental Health Policy Advisory Committee

In 2024-25, the ministry, through the Mental Health and Addiction Police Advisory Committee,
continued to provide a platform for collaborative information-sharing, issue resolution, and the
alignment of resources among police services, mental health and addiction specialists, policy
leaders, and government and community-based service providers. The committee worked across
the province to strengthen coordinated responses to mental health-related calls by:

   •    distributing 3,000 copies and printing an additional 3,000 copies of the Police
        Considerations for Mental Health–Related Calls Quick Reference Guide, which clarifies the
        responsibilities of police in responding to such calls;

   •    distributing 18,000 copies of the Addiction and Mental Health Supports Public Resource
        Card, with 7,000 more printed to ensure vulnerable Albertans and their families are
        informed about available government supports;

   •    continuing to implement the HealthIM app-based program under a three-year contract
        valued at $2,219,760.00 ($739,920 annually). in collaboration with law enforcement, the
        Ministry of Mental Health and Addiction (MHA), and other stakeholders, set to expire in
        March 2026 with an option to extend for one additional year; and

   •    continuing to implement the Provincial Law Enforcement Mental Health Consultation Line,
        funded by a $210,000 contribution from MHA, to expedite access to mental health
        professionals and connect individuals with appropriate community supports.

These initiatives are helping ensure that police services across Alberta are equipped with the
necessary tools to promote wellness, support recovery and contribute to safer communities.




Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                      29
Results Analysis



2.2   Implement therapeutic living units and supports in correctional facilities in alignment
      with and commitment to a recovery-oriented system of care.

Therapeutic Living Units

As part of the Government of Alberta’s commitment to a recovery-oriented system of care, the
ministry continued to partner with MHA to establish Therapeutic Living Units (TLUs) within
provincial correctional facilities. TLUs provide individuals in custody who are at risk of substance
use disorders and mental health concerns with access to holistic, evidence-based addiction
treatment aimed at supporting recovery and reducing the risk of recidivism. The first three TLUs
were launched in 2023, with a fourth unit opening at the Calgary Correctional Centre in May 2024.

In 2024-25, the ministry continued its partnership with Beccarian Correctional Care (formerly
Recovery Oriented Systems of Care Solutions Group) and MHA to operate and deliver programming
in the TLUs. Correctional staff oversee unit operations and work closely with Beccarian
                                           Correctional Care to identify candidates suitable for
                                           participation. The program is voluntary and available to
 Quick facts:                              sentenced individuals who have an aggregate sentence of
                                           at least 90 days, and to remanded individuals with a
 In 2024-25:                               minimum of 90 days remaining before a major court
                                           appearance, a demonstrated need for substance use
 • Average daily occupancy rate            treatment, and who meet specific eligibility criteria.
     in the TLUs was 90 per cent
 • 54 individuals successfully             To further enhance support services, transitional services
     completed in-custody                  operated by Beccarian were implemented across Alberta’s
     programming.                          remaining adult correctional facilities between June and
                                           December 2024. These transitional services are accessible
                                           to individuals who are ineligible for TLUs due to limited
time in custody or other eligibility constraints and focus on connecting clients with recovery
communities, treatment programs and community-based supports prior to release. In 2024-25, the
ministry received $3.43 million from MHA to support the operation of the TLUs and associated
transitional services across Alberta.

2.3   Continue to modernize corrections technology to enhance service delivery and
      promote system sustainability.

Wi-Fi in Provincial Correctional Centres

Reliable Wi-Fi connectivity is essential to modernizing operations and delivering enhanced services
within Alberta’s correctional facilities. Building on the initial implementation of wireless
infrastructure at the Edmonton Remand Centre, the ministry expanded its efforts in 2024-25, and in
partnership with the Ministry of Technology and Innovation invested $543,500 to successfully
implement Wi-Fi at the Red Deer Remand Centre. This initiative is part of a broader strategy to
improve access to secure, digital tools that support rehabilitation, education, and operational
efficiency. During the fiscal year, a competitive procurement process was completed, and a vendor
was selected to develop wiring plans and commence construction at additional correctional centres
across the province. Once fully operational, the Wi-Fi infrastructure will support the delivery of
stakeholder-led programming and services, such as post-secondary institution educational services,
community-based programming and health-care services. These improvements will increase
service accessibility for inmates while enabling staff to streamline workflows and enhance facility
operations.




30                                             Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



New Internet-based Video Visitation System

In 2024-25, the ministry advanced its efforts to support
family and community connections for individuals in           Quick facts:
custody through the implementation of a new video
visitation system. In partnership with the Ministry of        2024-25 Correctional Services
Technology and Innovation, the system was launched at         Technology Statistics:
the Edmonton Remand Centre to facilitate personal
visits, with $1.03 million invested specifically to support • 2,259 inmates across three
monitoring services through a contact with the                    correctional centres had access
Elizabeth Fry Society. The new platform allows visitors           to Wi-Fi services in 2024-25.
to connect remotely from any location using their             • More than 5,500 visitors have
personal devices, which significantly expanded daily              registered for the Video Visitation
visitation capacity. Maintaining meaningful contact with          System service since
family, friends, and community supports is a key factor           implementation in February
in successful reintegration and long-term rehabilitation.         2024.
During the fiscal year, video visitation services were
extended to include professional visits, enabling secure
virtual access for probation officers, legal counsel and law enforcement personnel. The ministry is
currently assessing opportunities to expand the video visitation system to additional provincial
correctional centres to further enhance connectivity, reduce administrative burden and improve
outcomes for individuals in custody.

2.4   Improve awareness of Clare’s Law and other tools to assist Albertans at risk of
      domestic violence make informed decisions about their safety.

Clare’s Law Public Awareness Campaign

The Disclosure to Protect Against Domestic Violence (Clare’s Law) Act empowers individuals at risk
of domestic violence by providing them with critical information about a current or former intimate
partner’s history of domestic violence or related behaviours. This disclosure enables individuals to
make informed decisions about their personal safety and take steps to prevent victimization or re-
victimization. The Alberta Integrated Threat and Risk Assessment Centre is responsible for the
operationalization of Clare’s Law, including coordination with law enforcement and community
partners.

In 2024-25, the ministry spent $300,000 in funding from the Federal National Action Plan to end
gender-based violence to implement a range of awareness and capacity-building initiatives. This
included printing and distributing educational materials, engaging a qualified vendor to conduct
two targeted surveys, expanding the Clare’s Law social service response, and supporting
stakeholder training sessions delivered by the ministry’s Clare’s Law coordinator. Awareness and
education activities related to Clare’s Law will continue as part of a long-term engagement strategy,
with training and materials made available to frontline professionals, service providers and
community members across the province.

2.5   Improve access to timely and efficient services and supports for victims of crime and
      tragedy.

Victims of Crime Assistance Program

Alberta’s Victims of Crime Assistance Program (VAP) provides timely access to financial assistance
and related supports for individuals impacted by violent crime. Administered in partnership with
Alberta Blue Cross, the program issues victims their own victims of crime Alberta Blue Cross card,


Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                       31
Results Analysis



which can be used to access extended medical benefits directly related to injuries sustained from
victimization. Approved health service providers may invoice Alberta Blue Cross directly for
treatment and support services, while victims may also be reimbursed for eligible emergency-
related expenses, including:

     •   safety and security related out-of-pocket expenses;
     •   immediate need, and basic necessity expenses;
     •   emergency temporary accommodation;
     •   relocation expenses for human trafficking victims;
     •   emergency travel funding for those seeking to escape domestic violence;
     •   reimbursement for medical aid repair, replacement, or newly required aids; and
     •   other additional unexpected costs incurred by the victim as a result of the crime.
In 2024-25, the ministry received and processed 2,974 applications and allocated over $8.1 million
to support victims of crime through the VAP. By offering responsive and trauma-informed
assistance, the ministry is ensuring victims receive the support they need when it matters most.
Program data collected on funding decisions will inform future improvements and ensure the
evolving needs of victims across Alberta are effectively addressed.

New Victim Services Delivery Model

In 2024-25, $25.7 million was provided to support provision of services to victims of crime and
tragic circumstances. This included funding for external partner organizations to provide vital
supports and services to victims of crime and tragedy, including the establishment of a new
regional model for police-based victim services. The updated provincial model for victim services
encompasses:

     •   a regional governance structure for RCMP-based victim services, focusing on Alberta's
         smaller, rural, and remote communities;

     •   continued funding for municipalities and Indigenous Nations operating their own police
         agencies; and

     •   specialized support for victims of specific crimes or those requiring additional assistance.

This past year, Alberta’s government transitioned from funding 60 independent victim-serving
societies to four integrated regional victim serving societies (RVSS), ensuring that resources are
deployed to underserved areas and, improving access to immediate support. The transition was
facilitated by up to six months of funding for victim-serving societies under the old model to
minimize disruption to victims, communities, and staff. The RVSS are regionally aligned with RCMP
district boundaries, allowing for enhanced service delivery. Local frontline court and support
navigators work out of RCMP detachments, ensuring victims receive support within their own
communities. This new delivery model aims to foster greater collaboration and integration among
criminal justice stakeholders, resulting in more operational efficiency and increasing victim
participation in the justice system.




32                                               Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



Performance Measure 2.a:
    Average days to decision for applications to the Victims of Crime Assistance Program


                          Prior Years’ Results
                                                                        2024-25          2024-25
 2020-21             2021-22            2022-23             2023-24      Target           Actual


 58 days             35 days            66 days             49 days   40 days         44 days

This performance measure evaluates the effectiveness of the VAP in providing timely support to
victims of crime. It demonstrates the ministry's commitment to offering prompt, direct assistance
to those affected by crime by ensuring that applications are adjudicated quickly upon receipt. The
legacy victims of crime financial Benefits program required extensive police and medical
documentation to determine eligibility, which often resulted in significant delays due to lengthy
court processes.

In 2024-25, the average time to decision for VAP applications was higher than the target of 40 days
but saw a 10.2 per cent improvement compared to 2023-24. Factors affecting the 2024-25
performance include the learning curve associated with onboarding and training new Frontline
Court & Support Navigators, following the October 2024 launch of the RVSS. VAP staff worked
closely with RVSS staff and clients to gather necessary information for decision-making to facilitate
smoother adjudication processes.

Performance Measure 2.b:
      Average daily occupancy rate in Therapeutic Living Units in Provincial Correctional
      Centres


                          Prior Years’ Results
                                                                        2024-25          2024-25
 2020-21             2021-22            2022-23             2023-24      Target           Actual


 Not                 Not                Not
                                                            87%       71%             90%
 Available           Available          Available

This new performance measure, introduced in the 2024-27 business plan, tracks the occupancy
rate of available bedspaces in the Therapeutic Living Unit (TLU) program. The first TLU was
established at the Red Deer Remand Centre in July 2023, followed by openings at the Lethbridge
Correctional Centre in October 2023, Fort Saskatchewan Correctional Centre in February 2024, and
the Calgary Correctional Centre in May 2024. Given that the TLUs have only been fully operational
since May 2024, there is limited historical data to assess baseline trends.

In 2024-25, the TLU daily occupancy rate exceeded its target of 71 per cent. On average, available
TLU bed spaces were filled to 90 per cent capacity throughout the year. Operational adjustments,
including reductions in available bed spaces for infrastructure maintenance, were accounted for to
ensure accurate representation of occupancy rates.

This performance measure supports the ministry’s commitment to a recovery-oriented system of
care, aimed at providing comprehensive mental health and addiction recovery services. It also
aligns with the mandate of the ministry to assess client needs and offer evidence-based
rehabilitation.


Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                       33
Results Analysis



Occupancy rates may fluctuate due to factors such as inmates' length of stay in custody. A 90 per
cent occupancy rate indicates that the TLU program is effectively identifying eligible participants
and completing admissions efficiently. This measure also reflects the significant demand for such
programming within correctional facilities and highlights the willingness of Alberta’s inmate
population to participate.

Outcome Three: Alberta is prepared and resilient to the impacts of disasters
Public Safety and Emergency Services is dedicated to supporting municipalities and communities
throughout all stages of emergencies and disasters, including preparedness, response, and
recovery, through the Alberta Emergency Management Agency (AEMA). The Provincial Emergency
Coordination Centre (PECC) plays a critical role in monitoring and reporting on events across
Alberta, providing a centralized space for coordination during actual emergencies. Continued
enhancements to emergency communication systems and public alerting services ensure that
Albertans receive accurate and timely information in the face of emerging threats, helping to
protect lives and property. The ministry's ongoing efforts focus on improving coordination,
response time, and community resilience, ensuring that Alberta is well-prepared to face the
challenges posed by natural and human-made disasters.

Key Objectives

3.1   Support Albertans and communities to raise their awareness of disaster risk and
      preventative action.

Fire and Flood Mitigation Strategy

In alignment with the government’s mandate to develop a flood and fire mitigation strategy, the
ministry continued to support cross-government collaboration on this strategy. The Ministry of
Forestry and Parks serves as the lead agency for wildfires, while the Ministry of Environment and
Protected Areas leads flood mitigation efforts. In 2024-25, the ministry contributed input to the
development of a provincial fire mitigation strategy alongside Forestry and Parks. This ongoing
collaboration ensures a comprehensive, multi-agency approach to reducing the risks and impacts of
future natural disasters and further enhances the safety and resilience of Alberta’s communities.

Provincial Hazard Identification and Risk
Assessment program                                      Quick facts:

In 2024-25, the ministry began implementing the         2024-25 stakeholder satisfaction result
Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment (HIRA)        for the HIRA’s training program:
framework, aimed at providing a standardized
process for assessing disaster risks across the         •   92 per cent of participants strongly
province. This initiative supports government               agreed that the course clearly
departments and stakeholders by ensuring                    explains HIRA concepts.
consistent, integrated decision-making to reduce
the likelihood and impact of disasters. In              •   100 per cent of participants agreed
December 2024, the HIRA implementation                      or strongly agreed that course
approach was endorsed, which includes                       content is logically and clearly
identifying priority hazards and establishing an            structured.
assessment schedule for 2025.                           •   100 per cent of participants rated
                                                            course materials as good or
In line with the September 2020 Office of the               excellent.
Auditor General report recommendations, the
ministry developed training courses and an online
e-tool to enhance stakeholder capacity in risk assessments. This included the development of three


34                                              Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Results Analysis



core courses: HIRA Orientation, HIRA Application, and the HIRA e-tool course. Additionally, an
application based on the Geographic Information System (GIS) is being developed to improve risk
visualization across Alberta. Phase 1 of HIRA implementation is underway, with stakeholder
engagement on a flood risk assessment in Lethbridge in March 2025 and Cochrane in April 2025.
Further assessments are planned for other beginning of 2025-26 and continuing thereafter on a
rotating basis.

Be Prepared Program

In 2024-25, the ministry continued to enhance the Be Prepared Program to build resilience and
disaster risk literacy across Alberta. This program promotes disaster preparedness through
research, public education, and strategic partnerships. In July 2024, the program released its fourth
annual Preparedness Survey of Albertans, with 1,535 respondents providing valuable insights into
Albertans’ readiness and resilience in the event of a disaster which shaped programming and
outreach strategy. The annual budget for the Survey of Albertans was $20,000. The Resilience
Builders Network, a virtual community focused on public preparedness, grew by 61 per cent during
the fiscal year. Recent program updates include new content addressing water shortages and
extreme heat. The program was promoted at several conferences, including Bordering on Disaster
(September 2024), the Rural Municipalities of Alberta Conference (November 2024), and teachers’
conventions (February 2025), engaging over 580 representatives. Conference participation further
strengthens interprovincial collaboration, targets rural preparedness needs, and bridges youth
preparedness gaps, through resources like the National Test Alert Guide which was downloaded 91
times in 2024.

Emergency Management and Emergency Social Services (ESS) Training

The ministry continued enhancing the ESS program to support communities during emergencies
and disasters, focusing on training and supporting the consistent delivery of essential services. In
2024-25, two new ESS courses were introduced, delivering 106 in-person and virtual sessions and
equipping 2,388 participants with the skills to assist evacuees and those impacted by emergencies.
ESS provides critical support for displaced individuals, covering basic needs such as food, clothing,
and accommodation.

To enhance disaster preparedness and community resilience across Alberta, the ministry continues
to provide training and sets standards for individuals with responsibilities under emergency
management regulations. In 2024-25, 20 emergency management courses were delivered through
502 sessions, engaging 19,286 participants. These initiatives help to build resilience, ensure
readiness, and strengthen Alberta’s capacity to manage disaster impacts.

Regional Field Officer and First Nation Field Officer Programs

In 2024, Regional and First Nations Field Operations continued to enhance Alberta’s emergency
management capacity by building local readiness, providing expert planning and response support,
and conducting in-person reviews of emergency management plans. Field officers played a critical
role in wildfire response efforts, assisting evacuations in Peace River, Fort McMurray and
Edmonton. In Jasper, officers supported unified command efforts for more than 30 days. First
Nations field officers also aided the Little Red River Cree Nation during the Semo Complex wildfires,
helping evacuate 6,000 members. These coordinated efforts reflect the ministry’s growing
proficiency in the Incident Command System and the Alberta Incident Management System,
strengthening Alberta’s overall resilience and improving emergency response across the province.




Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                       35
Results Analysis



3.2   Work with emergency management partners to enhance the coordination of disaster
      response and recovery across Alberta, including timely and fiscally responsible
      administration of disaster financial assistance.

Disaster Financial Assistance Programs

In 2024, the Disaster Recovery Program (DRP) continued to support individuals, small businesses
and local authorities impacted by eligible disaster events through financial assistance, expert advice
and coordinated recovery resources. The Minister approved two DRP initiatives: $149 million for
the Municipality of Jasper, which included assistance for 11 ministries to address disaster response
costs and provide temporary accommodations for essential personnel, and $2.8 million for the
Regional Municipality of Wood Buffalo, which included assistance for the Ministry of
Transportation and Economic Corridors’ response-related costs. The Jasper wildfire posed unique
challenges, with damage zones crossing federal, provincial and municipal jurisdictions,
complicating roles and responsibilities throughout response and recovery operations.

Municipal Wildfire Assistance Programs

Throughout 2024-25, the province-wide Municipal Wildfire Assistance Program (MWAP) continued
to provide critical financial support to municipalities facing extraordinary wildfire suppression
costs outside of Alberta’s Forest Protection Area. The program assists local authorities with
incremental expenses that exceed regular firefighting operations. Two MWAP applications were
approved during the year: $2.6 million for the County of Grande Prairie No. 1 and $3.6 million for
the Municipal District of Peace No. 135. These approvals reflect the province’s ongoing commitment
to ensuring municipalities have the necessary resources to respond effectively to wildfire threats
and protect their communities, infrastructure and natural environments.

Provincial Flood Stockpile

The Provincial Flood Stockpile, established to strengthen Alberta’s flood emergency readiness,
provides essential equipment and supplies to support communities and municipalities during flood
events. In 2024-25, Foothills County received $105,000 to support ongoing stockpile maintenance
and staffing. In addition, stockpile resources were deployed to four communities, including the
Town of Fahler, Village of Linden, County of Forty Mile and Town of Milk River in response to
flooding hazards. As part of the province’s broader flood mitigation strategy, the Provincial Flood
Stockpile plays a vital role in ensuring timely, coordinated responses that help protect lives,
property and critical infrastructure across the province.

Personal Protective Equipment Strategic Stockpile (PPESS)

The PPESS initiative maintains a 60-day reserve of critical personal protective equipment, including
gloves, masks, face shields, gowns, disinfectant wipes, and hand sanitizer, for Alberta’s non-
healthcare sector during health emergencies. In July 2024, the stockpile refresh project was
launched, replacing 3.3 million Level 3 masks and face shields. The team collaborated with Service
Alberta and Red Tape Reduction to issue a request for proposal, secure vendor quotes and prepare
warehouse space. By leveraging Government of Canada standing offers, inventory costs were
reduced by 78 per cent, with total expenditures of $378,000. The refresh project is expected to be
completed by 2027-28.

Provincial Emergency Coordination Centre (PECC)

In 2024, the PECC continued to serve as Alberta’s 24/7 hub for the coordination of the province’s
response to emergency and disasters. The PECC collects, evaluates and shares critical information
during single or multiple incidents, and supports First Nations and local authorities during


36                                              Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                       Results Analysis



response across the province. During the 2024 wildfire season, the PECC played a key role in
coordinating support for communities affected across central and northern Alberta, including the
evacuation of the Municipality of Jasper due to a
wildfire in Jasper National Park.
                                                         Quick facts:
Wildland Urban Interface Field Officer Program
                                                         In 2024-25, PECC was elevated
The Wildland Urban Interface (WUI) is where human        above Level 1 for 35 days:
infrastructure borders undeveloped wildlands and
usually presents complex wildfire management             • Five days in May 2024 due to
challenges. WUI field officers play a key role in            wildfires impacting communities
mitigation, preparedness and response, working               across northern Alberta.
closely with municipal and First Nations fire            • Thirty days in July 2024 to
departments to strengthen coordination and resource          support wildfire response efforts
support. WUI response teams deliver emergency                in central and northern Alberta,
wildfire response, support the provincial WUI                including the Jasper National
advisory committees, and lead training and education         Park wildfire, which affected the
initiatives. In 2024-25, the program trained over 700        Municipality of Jasper.
municipal and First Nations fire service members. To
meet increasing demand, the program will expand
from two to six teams in 2025-26. This enhanced capacity is supported by over $4 million in new
funding from Natural Resources Canada and Alberta Forestry and Parks.

Alberta First Responders’ Radio Communication System

The ministry remains committed to enhancing the reliability of the Alberta First Responders Radio
Communication System (AFFRCS) to ensure first responders have access to an efficient radio
communication network during emergencies. AFFRCS offers a secure, public-safety-grade radio
network, extending coverage to over 95 per cent of the province along major highways. Channel
upgrades at six sites have significantly improved radio traffic capacity, with ongoing maintenance
ensuring 24/7 reliability. Despite rising preventative maintenance costs and financial uncertainties
affecting upgrades, the ministry is addressing these challenges through strategic planning,
technological innovation, and close collaboration with public safety partners.

Alberta Emergency Alert Program

AEMA plays a vital role in delivering timely, life-saving information during emergencies such as
wildfires, floods and tornadoes. The Alberta Emergency Alert system continues to be enhanced to
ensure effective public warnings. In 2024-25, AEMA supported 410 live alert issuers, over 1,000
trained users, 84 police alerters, 326 community alerters, and four 24/7 Government of Alberta
warning notification coordinators. The system remains a trusted tool for keeping Albertans safe
and informed. Ongoing collaboration with Public Safety Canada, provinces, territories and industry
partners ensures integration of best practices and evolving technologies.

Emergency Social Services (ESS)

In 2024-25, the ministry continued to support local authorities in addressing emergency social
services needs ensuring essential needs are met for evacuated Albertans. The ESS team expanded
from four to seven officers, aligning more closely with Regional Field Operations. The ministry also
maintained the Registration and Reception Centre Program to help local authorities track displaced
residents. Additionally, a new information-sharing platform was introduced to strengthen
collaboration among ESS leads across Alberta. Operational cost for ESS initiatives in 2024-25 was
$797,000.



Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                      37
Results Analysis



All Hazards Incident Management Teams

To strengthen Alberta’s emergency management capacity, the ministry continued to invest in the
development and support of municipal and regional capabilities for hazard management. In 2024-
25, five regional All-Hazard Incident Management Teams (AHIMTs) were equipped to enhance
response capabilities during emergencies or disasters that exceed local resources. Supported
through a conditional annual grant of $250,000 shared across five teams, the funding enables
continued operations and specialized training. The AEMA also provides centralized training to
ensure interoperability across all AHIMTs. Team members contribute their expertise to their home
municipalities, creating an added benefit that improves local response capacity, and this has been
recognized as a key success of the initiative.

Emergency Management Exercise (EMX) 2024 and 2025

                                                     On April 4, 2024, the AEMA conducted EMX
 Quick facts:                                        24, a full-day tabletop exercise designed to
                                                     strengthen emergency management
 In 2024-25,                                         coordination within the Government of
                                                     Alberta. The exercise engaged 87 executive
 •    SAR Alberta reported increases in activity     leaders to enhance understanding of crisis
      compared to 2023 (excluding parks and          roles and responsibilities. Key themes
      fire departments):                             included improving communication, clarifying
       - 30 per cent increase in incidents           authority, enhancing decision-making,
           responded to (480)                        expanding training and refining emergency
       - 20 per cent increase in regular service     planning processes. On March 20, 2025,
           hours (154,606)                           AEMA held EMX 25, focusing on coordinated
       - 80 per cent increase in disaster            response to concurrent emergencies, such as
           service hours (12,025)                    evacuations, wildfires and major event
                                                     disruptions. This functional exercise brought
 •    During the 2024 wildfire season, 19 SAR        together the government’s consequence
      teams and 303 volunteers supported             management and business continuity officers,
      responses at 13 locations across Alberta.      PECC personnel, senior government leaders
       - Jasper wildfire involved 53 volunteers      and federal partners. Informed by the
         contributing 4,587 hours.                   challenges of the 2024 hazard season, EMX 25
 •    The Underwater Search Team responded           provided a critical opportunity to test and
      to 15 incidents, logging 582 on-scene          improve emergency procedures, ensuring a
      hours.                                         more effective and coordinated provincial
                                                     response in future emergencies. Operational
 •    Estimated value of skilled volunteer           cost for EMX exercises in 2024-25 was
      labour: $4,180,325.                            $70,000.

Improving the delivery of search and rescue operations

PSES continued to implement government’s mandate to review and recommend improvements to
Alberta’s search and rescue (SAR) delivery model and funding. In 2024-25, SAR Alberta received $2
million in interim grant funding to support administration, operations, equipment, and training.

3.3   Develop and implement initiatives that contribute to continuous improvement and
      refinement of the province’s emergency management framework.

Emergency Management Legislative Review

On May 9, 2024, the Emergency Statutes Amendment Act, 2024 (ESAA) was introduced to strengthen
Alberta’s emergency management framework in response to lessons learned during the 2023


38                                            Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                     Results Analysis



wildfire season. The amendments to the Emergency Management Act (EMA) introduced several
enhancements, including new ministerial authorities to improve coordination and oversight during
emergencies. Local authorities are now required to notify the Minister of both the anticipated
powers they intend to exercise under a State of Local Emergency (SOLE) and the termination of a
declared SOLE. In addition, new provisions were established outlining compensation requirements
when the Minister assumes control of a local emergency response. These amendments ensure
Alberta has stronger legislative tools to protect communities from increasingly frequent and
complex hazards such as wildfires, floods and droughts. The ESAA came into force on May 30, 2024.

Further amendments to the EMA in 2025-26 will address rising disaster-related costs, improve
oversight and accountability, and support more robust all-hazard emergency planning at the local
level. Input from experts representing 68 communities across Alberta helped shape these updates.
Further regulatory amendments to the Government Emergency Management Regulation, Local
Authority Emergency Management Regulation and Disaster Recovery Regulation, will ensure
Alberta’s emergency management system continues to evolve in response to emerging risks.



2023 Spring Hazards Post-Incident Assessment

In response to the 2023 hazard season, internal post-incident assessments were completed by
Government of Alberta ministries involved in emergency response, while a broader external review
is ongoing through a third-party vendor and will continue into the 2025 hazard season. Several
interim improvements are already being implemented, including updated operational policies and
standard operating procedures at the PECC, expansion of the WUI program from two to six teams,
and the redevelopment of Alberta’s Emergency Social Services Framework. These assessments are
essential to identifying strengths, addressing gaps and enhancing preparedness, accountability and
overall emergency response capacity. Operational cost for the third-party review was $699,000.

Advocacy on Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements.

Alberta collaborated with Public Safety Canada (PSC) to modernize disaster financial assistance,
providing input and advocating for improvements. After receiving the Government of Canada’s
draft modernized Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements (DFAA) guidelines in May 2024,
Alberta started aligning its provincial disaster financial assistance with the modernized DFAA to
improve federal mitigation funding access, streamline administration and enhance disaster
resilience. Alberta, as co-chair of the Canadian Council of Emergency Management Organizations’
Recovery Working Group, led national discussions on implementation strategies and challenges.
Alberta also hosted a DFAA workshop in Edmonton in November 2024 with attendees from
Saskatchewan and British Columbia. PSC delivered training on the modernized DFAA and gathered
provincial and territorial feedback on program material and implementation improvements. New
Disaster Assistance Directives have been developed, including legislative updates to the Emergency
Management Act and Disaster Recovery Regulation along with a structured change management
plan to support stakeholder adaptation and improve efficiency, training and communication. The
DFAA took effect on April 1, 2025. The Disaster Assistance Directives are planned to be in place
before any programs are approved through a Ministerial Order for the 2025 disaster season. This
will ensure policy stability and greater sustainability to support stronger disaster recovery for
Albertans and their communities.

Provincial Emergency Coordination Centre (PECC) Augmentee Program

In 2024-25, the ministry continued to manage the PECC Augmentee Program, which trains
Government of Alberta employees from various departments to support emergency response
operations in key PECC roles. The program enables a scalable, coordinated response to large-scale


Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                    39
Results Analysis



emergencies by temporarily increasing staffing capacity within the PECC. During the fiscal year, 81
augmentees were trained and actively contributed to strengthening Alberta’s overall disaster
management readiness. In January 2025, a virtual information session introduced 96 Government
of Alberta staff to the PECC and the Augmentee Program.

Performance Measure 3.a:
      Percentage of local authorities visited by an AEMA field officer and had their
      Community Emergency Management Plan reviewed annually

                         Prior Years’ Results
                                                                            2024-25            2024-25
  2020-21          2021-22          2022-23          2023-24                 Target             Actual


  83%              85%              90%              93%                90%                 95%

This performance measure reflects the level of preparedness and resilience across the province. By
reviewing emergency plans, field officers can identify weaknesses or gaps in preparedness,
allowing local authorities to address them proactively. These reviews ensures that local authorities
align with established standard and best practices, fostering a cohesive and unified approach to
disaster management. Keeping plans updated strengthens community resilience and enhance
overall disaster readiness.

In 2024-25, AEMA field officers visited 95 per cent of communities in Alberta and reviewed their
emergency management plans, exceeding the target by five per cent, with 316 reviews out of 333
local authorities. The five per cent increase in emergency plan reviews can be attributed to a
combination of stronger community engagement, increased capacity, and targeted outreach.
Several communities demonstrated greater readiness and responsiveness, which helped facilitate
more reviews. In addition, newly hired field officers were fully trained and integrated into their
regions this year, allowing for expanded coverage and a focused effort to connect with communities
that had not been reached in previous years.

Although First Nations communities do not fall under the jurisdiction of the Emergency
Management Act, First Nations field officers regularly visit communities and offer various in-person
services, including reviews of community emergency management plans. In 2024-25, the number of
completed plan reviews and visits for First Nations communities was 13 out of 46. This two per
cent increase can be attributed to stronger engagement from First Nations communities, with more
scheduling reviews and showing increased readiness to update their emergency management
plans.

Performance Measure 3.b:
      Percentage of Albertans who have taken at least three preparedness actions in the
      past year (annual survey)


                         Prior Years’ Results
                                                                            2024-25            2024-25
  2020-21          2021-22          2022-23          2023-24                 Target             Actual


  Not
                   55%              47%              51%                53%                 50%
  Available




40                                              Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                         Results Analysis



Preparedness is one of the four phases of emergency management, and individual preparedness
plays a critical role in community resilience. This performance measure evaluates the effectiveness
of the AEMA’s Be Prepared public education initiatives by tracking the percentage of Albertans who
report completing at least three preparedness activities, such as: making an emergency kit, creating
an evacuation plan, or taking other similar steps. Although the survey has been conducted annually
since 2021, it was formally introduced as a key performance measure in the PSES 2024-25 Business
Plan.

The target for 2024-25 was set at 53 per cent, informed by previous trends and the anticipated
effects of public awareness efforts. The actual result for the year was 50 per cent, a three-
percentage-point variance below the target and one point below the previous year’s result of
51 per cent. This result remains within the ±2.5 per cent margin of error typical for this type of
survey, indicating a stable trend.

Preparedness levels have fluctuated in recent years, with a significant drop from 55 per cent in
2021-22 to 47 per cent in 2022-23, likely due to shifting public priorities following the COVID-19
pandemic. A rebound was seen in 2023-24, with a 51 per cent result, and a minor decrease to
50 per cent in 2024-25 suggests that awareness efforts are regaining ground. External factors such
as economic pressures may continue to affect the public’s ability to invest in emergency
preparedness.

Internally, AEMA’s preparedness initiatives, including public education, increased outreach and
improved access to preparedness resources, are expected to show greater impact over time. While
current results reflect a modest decline, the findings highlight the importance of continued
investment in preparedness education and the need to tailor communication strategies to reach
diverse communities across Alberta. Ongoing evaluation will ensure that public education remains
effective, relevant and adaptable to changing circumstances.




Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                        41
Results Analysis




Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology
Performance Measure 1.a:
     Median time from intake to resolution of Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods
     (SCAN) complaints

Source: Public Safety and Emergency Services Administrative Data, Public Security Division.

Methodology: the measure monitors the timeliness and overall efficiency of the Alberta Sheriffs’
Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods (SCAN) unit in keeping Albertan communities safe by
dealing with problem properties used for illegal activities such as drug trafficking, prostitution,
child exploitation and gang-related crime.

The measure is calculated by comparing the date a complaint is received to the date a resolution is
made, which results in the ‘time to resolution’, and then the median of all the times to resolution
indicates the performance, as shown in the equation below:

                              Median time from intake to resolution =
                       Median (Number of days from intake to resolution for
                               each SCAN complaint in the fiscal year)

The overall objective of the measure is to contribute to community safety and minimize negative
impacts of problem properties with quicker file resolutions. The impacts to a family living near a
drug house are significant and saving a family from enduring this type of activity for even one less
day is a huge contribution to public safety.

The expansion of SCAN by 20 investigators directly impacts the files that were previously
unassigned, which in turn directly reduced the amount of time it takes to resolve a complaint. In
addition, the time it takes to resolve a complaint can vary depending on how complex the case is,
changes in its status, the timing of external hearings, and the specific steps needed to complete the
investigation. To improve outcomes, the ministry is enhancing SCAN operations by adding staff and
strengthening partnerships with RCMP and municipal police services.

Performance Indicator 1.a:
     Violent and property crime rates per 100,000 population

Source: Uniform Crime Reporting Survey, Canadian Centre for Justice and Community Safety
Statistics (CCJCSS). Data is available annually. CCJCSS Table data was available in July 2024.

Methodology: crime rate is calculated using incident-based Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR2) data,
which measures police-reported crime in each Canadian jurisdiction. Crime rate measures the
volume of police-reported crime, expressed as the number of crimes per 100,000 people. Historical
results are revised annually to reflect updated data provided by police services for incidents that
occurred in previous years. Property crime includes theft, break and enter, fraud and possession of
stolen goods. It does not include the use of threat of violence against an individual. Violent crime
includes homicide, attempted murder, robbery, abduction and various forms of sexual assault. It
does not include traffic incidents that result in death or bodily harm.




42                                              Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                            Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 1.b:
     Violent and non-violent Crime Severity Index

Source: Uniform Crime Reporting Survey, Canadian Centre for Justice and Community Safety
Statistics (CCJCSS). Data is available annually. CCJCSS Table data was available on July 27, 2023.

Methodology: the crime severity index is a measure of the seriousness of police reported crime.
Each criminal offence is weighted based on the sentence imposed upon the offender. More serious
offences, such as homicide or serious assault, are weighted more heavily than minor thefts and
minor assaults. The crime severity index is calculated using incident-based Uniform Crime
Reporting Survey (UCR2) data. It should be noted that incident-based UCR2 data was not available
for all respondents for the period from 1998 to 2015. Instead, these police services continued to
report to the Aggregate Uniform Crime Reporting Survey (UCR), which meant that a process of
imputation was necessary to translate UCR data into its UCR2 equivalents. Approximately 80 per
cent of the offence codes in the aggregate survey mapped 1:1 onto the incident-based violation
codes in the UCR2. For the remaining categories of violation (such as the “aggregate other Criminal
Code” category), it was necessary to estimate their seriousness by looking at the distribution of
other Criminal Code offences in the reports of existing UCR2 respondents.

Performance Measure 2.a:
     Average days to decision for applications to the Victims of Crime Assistance Program

Source: Public Safety and Emergency Services Administrative Data, Strategy, Support and
Integrated Initiatives Division.

Methodology: the measure reflects the effectiveness of the redesigned victims services delivery
program in providing timely support to victims of crime. The measure is calculated by comparing
the date the application is received to the date a decision is made, which results in the ‘time to
decision’, and then the average of all the times to decision indicates the performance, as shown in
the equation below:

                                             Cumulative number of days to decision
                                            for all VAP applications in the fiscal year
                Average days to decision = (                                            )
                                               Total number of VAP applications
                                                    processed in the fiscal year


Performance includes consideration of all decisions made and length of time from receipt of
application to date of decision. A five per cent margin of error is considered as the new Victims of
Crime Assistance Program was implemented as of September 1, 2022. By providing access to
emergency supports and services as soon as possible after victimization, the program aims to
ensure victims are supported while navigating the criminal justice system and long-term impacts of
victimization can be mitigated. The results of the evaluation will be used to inform future
enhancements and determine the need for additional program services or supports.




Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                           43
Results Analysis



Performance Measure 2.b:
     Average daily occupancy rate in Therapeutic Living Units in Provincial Correctional
     Centres

Source: Public Safety and Emergency Services Administrative Data, Correctional Services Division

Methodology: this measure demonstrates inmate participation in the recovery-oriented systems of
care addiction treatment programming while in custody. It reports the average daily utilization rate
of available TLU beds across correctional centres in the province. TLUs provide inmates an
opportunity to begin holistic addiction treatment, accessing supports while serving custodial time.
At the same time, TLUs allow them an opportunity to be released into a recovery community to
access supports as they continue their treatment journey, if they choose to do so.

Each provincial TLU calculates its daily occupancy rate by dividing the number of TLU participants
by the number of available bedspaces obtained from the TLU Bed Count Report generated from the
Offender Records and Correctional Administration (ORCA) system. The daily occupancy rate is
calculated by dividing the total daily count of occupied beds by the total daily count of available
beds in all provincial TLUs, multiplied by 100 percent, as shown in the formula below:

                                   Total daily count of occupied beds in all provincial TLUs
Average Daily Occupancy Rate = (                                                              ) X 100
                                   Total daily count of available beds in all provincial TLUs

A range of ±5 per cent in the result is considered acceptable and acknowledges the voluntary nature
of the program, as TLUs are optional and only available to select inmates meeting specific eligibility
criteria. The target TLU participant group consists of sentenced individuals with aggregate
sentences of 90 days or longer, and those who are remanded with a minimum of 90 days remaining
before a major court appearance, with a high need for substance abuse treatment. Strict guidelines
for reporting adjustments to bed space when changes occur have been introduced to ensure both
the “Total Count of Beds in Use” and “Available Beds” data points are accurately updated when
there is a temporary increase in the number of individuals enrolled in the TLU program.

Public Safety and Emergency Services is working with the Ministry of Mental health and Addiction
to explore options for enhancement of TLU programming, including an evaluation of the program
with a focus on staffing, training, project roll out and client engagement.

Performance Measure 3.a:
     Percentage of local authorities visited by an Alberta Emergency Management Agency
     field officer and had their Community Emergency Management Plan reviewed annually

Source: data and information regarding field visits and reviews of community emergency
management plans, including those completed both in-person and remotely, is recorded in ArcGIS,
a geographic information system application.
Methodology: field officers will typically conduct community emergency management plan reviews
in person with a representative from the local authority, preferably the director of emergency
management. The field officer may review the plan within the Community Emergency Management
Program database or can request an electronic copy in advance to prepare for the in-person review.
Regardless of the method, the field officer will record their observations and recommendations
within Community Emergency Management Program for future and ongoing tracking.
The following equation is used to process the data collected in the Community Emergency
Management Program:




44                                              Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                          Results Analysis



         Number of local authorities visited by AEMA field officers and had their
           Community Emergency Management Plan reviewed in a fiscal year
      %=(                                                                         ) × 100
                      Total number of local authorities in Alberta

This performance measure is calculated by comparing the number of local authorities who were
visited by an AEMA field officer and had their community emergency management plan reviewed in
a fiscal year to the total number of local authorities in Alberta. The resulting ratio is expressed as a
percentage. A confidence interval is not applicable since a representative sample is not used for
statistical inference. The data analysis for this performance measure only includes the local
authorities that have been visited by a field officer and who have had their community emergency
management plan reviewed either remotely or in-person. Both activities must have occurred for the
data to be included.

For local authorities who have adopted a regional approach for developing emergency management
plans, field officers review the regional plan and meet with the appropriate municipal
representative for the region. Review of an emergency management plan for a region, and
subsequent field visits, count as a review and visit for all constituent local authorities. Each
constituent community of a regional community emergency management plan is counted
separately for this performance measure rather than just counting one review and field visit.

Performance Measure 3.b:
     Percentage of Albertans who have taken at least three preparedness actions in the past
     year (annual survey)

Source: Personal Preparedness and Resilience Survey 2024: Final Report. Advanis Incorporated.

The annual preparedness survey targets Albertans aged 18 and older and is designed to achieve
demographic representation across age groups, genders, regions, and ethnic backgrounds.
Respondents are recruited through a vendor-managed General Population Random Sample (GPRS)
panel consisting of over 100,000 Alberta residents from diverse backgrounds. Participants are
contacted at random and invited to complete the survey via a secure link. In 2024, the survey
collected responses from 1,535 Albertans, exceeding the minimum annual target of 1,500
participants.

To ensure high-quality, representative data, the GPRS panel is regularly refreshed to reduce survey
fatigue and improve response accuracy. Following data collection, responses are processed and
analyzed using Statistical Package for the Social Sciences software and Advanis’ proprietary Online
Reporting Environment. Results are weighted to align with Alberta’s population distribution based
on Statistics Canada’s 2016 census data, adjusting for variations in gender, ethnicity, and age.

Survey findings are considered accurate within a margin of error of ±2.5 percentage points, 19
times out of 20, at a 95 per cent confidence level. Independent statistical tests are used to identify
meaningful differences among demographic groups, and only results meeting the 95 per cent
significance threshold are reported.

Insights from the survey inform the Ministry’s public education initiatives, outreach strategies,
preparedness planning, and resource offerings, ensuring they remain targeted and effective in
encouraging proactive emergency preparedness. By continuously adapting to the evolving needs
and preparedness levels of Albertans, these efforts help strengthen resilience and readiness across
the province.




Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                           45
Financial Information




Financial Information

Table of Contents

     Reporting Entity and Method Consolidation .................................................................................. 47
     Ministry Financial Highlights ............................................................................................................... 48
          Statement of Revenues and Expenses (unaudited) ............................................................................. 48
          Revenue and Expense Highlights ................................................................................................................ 49
          Breakdown of Revenues (unaudited) ....................................................................................................... 50
          Expenses – Directly Incurred Detailed by Object (unaudited) ....................................................... 51
     Supplemental Financial Information ................................................................................................ 52
          Tangible Capital Assets (unaudited).......................................................................................................... 52
     Other Financial Information ................................................................................................................ 53
          Disaster Recovery Program (unaudited) ................................................................................................. 55
          Statement of Credit or Recovery (unaudited)........................................................................................ 56
          Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited) .............................................................................................................. 57
          Payments Based on Agreements (unaudited) ....................................................................................... 59




Note: The financial statements for the Victims of Crime and Public Safety Fund were not available
prior to going to publication and will be posted when available.




46                                                                    Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                  Financial Information




Reporting Entity and Method Consolidation
The financial information is prepared in accordance with government’s stated accounting policies,
which are based on Canadian Public Sector Accounting Standards.

The reporting entity is the ministry for which the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency
Services is accountable. The accounts of the Ministry, which includes the department of Public
Safety and Emergency Services and the Victims of Crime and Public Safety Fund, are fully
consolidated using the line-by-line method, with the accounting policies described below.

Under this method, accounting policies of the consolidated entities are adjusted to conform to
government accounting policies and the results of each line item in their financial statements
(revenue, expense, assets, and liabilities) are included in government’s results. Revenue and
expense, capital, investing and financing transactions and related asset and liability balances
between the consolidated entities have been eliminated.

A list of the individual entities making up the ministry are shown on the “Management’s
Responsibility for Reporting” statement included in this annual report.




Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                      47
Financial Information




Ministry Financial Highlights
Statement of Revenues and Expenses (unaudited)
Year Ended March 31, 2025




48                                   Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Financial Information



Revenue and Expense Highlights


Revenues
Budget to Actual
Ministry revenues in 2024-25 are $416.5 million, which is $192.5 million or 86% per cent higher than
budgeted. The increased revenues are mainly the result of:
    •   $140 million higher than budget in transfer from Government of Canada (GOC) due to an
        increase in Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements (DFAA) for Jasper Wildfire and other
        Alberta wildfires.
    •   $48.5 million higher than budget in other revenue, primarily due to the return of prior year grant
        payments.
    •   $7.6 million higher than budget in Other Premiums, fees and licenses revenue due to an
        increase in 911 levy.
    •   Offset by $4.7 million decrease in Fines and Penalties from traffic tickets.

Actual to Actual
Actual revenues in 2024-25 reflect an increase of $125 million or 42.9 per cent:
   • $133.2 million increase in Federal Government Grants primarily due to higher revenues from
     Disaster Recovery Programs related to the Alberta wildfires, including costs associated with the
     Jasper Wildfire.
   • $6.6 million increase in Other Premiums, fees and licenses revenue, primarily due to an increase
     in 911 levy.
   • Offset by $11.3 million decrease in Other Revenue from 2023 Northwest Territories (NWT)
     wildfires evacuation cost recovery


Expenses
Budget to Actual
The total operating expense in 2024-25 was $1,457.1 million, which is $164.3 million or 12.7 per cent
higher than budget:
   • $162.8 million over budget in Alberta Emergency Management Agency (AEMA) due to an
     increase in Disaster Recovery Program funding including Jasper and other wildfires in Alberta.
   • $7.2 million over budget in the Public Security due to police support grant to Cities of Edmonton
     and Calgary.
   • Offset by $3.8 million decrease in Correctional Services, primarily due to vacant positions.

Actual to Actual
Actual operating expenses were $50.6 million or 3.4 per cent lower than 2023-24. The decrease in
expenses is mainly the result of:
   • $131 million decrease in AEMA due to a decrease in Disaster Recovery Program funding
     including 2023 Spring wildfires, NWT Evacuation, and North Central Flood.
   • Offset by:
     o    $47.2 million increase in Public Security, primarily due to Provincial Policing Agreement with
          RCMP and recruitment costs for sheriffs related to policing services.
     o    $26.5 million increase in Correctional Services due to recruitment costs on Custody
          Operations and Community Corrections.
     o    $4.3 million increase in Strategy, Support and Integrated Initiative program mainly due to
          grant funding for Community Initiatives Support



Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                            49
Financial Information



Breakdown of Revenues (unaudited)
The following information presents detailed revenues of the ministry. The objective of detailed revenues
disclosure is to provide information that is useful in understanding and assessing the financial impact of
government’s revenue raising and for enhancing legislative control.




                                               2025 Revenue Actuals
                                                     In thousands
                        Other Premiums, Fees
                            and Licences
                               $53,377                                               Surcharges
                                 13%                                                  $40,776
                                                                                        10%

         Investment Income
               $2,314
                 0%



                                                                                             Other Revenue
                                                                                               $142,025
                                                                                                  34%




             Transfer from
         Government of Canada
               $178,043
                 43%



     •     Transfers from Government of Canada ($178 million). Revenue from federal agreements,
           primarily for Disaster Recovery in support of Alberta wildfires.

     •     Other Premiums, Fees, and Licences ($53.4 million). Mainly for 911 levy and Security
           Services fees.

     •     Surcharges ($40.8 million). Victims of Crime and Public Safety Fund levies 20% Surcharge
           on all traffic ticket fine amounts that is deposited in the fund with statutory authority to spend
           on victims.

     •     Investment Income ($2.3 million). Comprised of interest earned on the VOCPSF and
           department funds invested in the Consolidated Liquidity Solution (CLS).

     •     Other Revenue ($142 million). For $73.8 million with Police Funding Model, $57.9 million for
           Refund Expenditure of disaster grant payments and Alberta First Responders Radio
           Communications System (AFRRACS) radio tower services.




50                                                  Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                        Financial Information



Expenses – Directly Incurred Detailed by Object (unaudited)
The following information presents expenses of the ministry that were directly incurred by object. The
objective of disclosure of expenses by object is to provide information that is useful in evaluating the
economic impact of government acquiring or consuming various types of resources.



                                       2025 Expense Actuals                  Other
                                                   In thousands              $927
       Amortization of                                                        0%
    tangible capital assets
           $28,417
              2%


        Grants
       $437,879                                                                        Salaries, wages and
         30%                                                                            employee benefits
                                                                                            $477,454
                                                                                               33%




                                                                             Supplies and
                                                                               services
                                                                              $512,388
                                                                                 35%




• Supplies and services spending of $512.4 million or 35 per cent of total spending is the ministry’s
  largest operating expense. Primarily for the Provincial Police Services Agreement and inmate food
  services contracts in Correctional Services. In addition to contract services, the ministry purchases
  all materials and supplies for correctional facilities and Alberta Emergency Management Agency
  (AEMA) across the province.
• Salaries, wages, and employee benefits expenses of $477.5 million, or 33 per cent of total ministry’s
  second largest spending. The ministry provides frontline programs and services that ensure
  Albertans have safe and protected communities and fair access to the public safety and emergency
  systems. Funding primarily covers positions in correctional facilities and community corrections
  offices, sheriffs, and enforcement workers, and AEMA services staff.
• Grants spending of $437.9 million or 30 per cent of total spending is the ministry’s third largest
  operating expense. It primarily provides operational funding for delivery of services by key
  stakeholders and partners via support to individuals, organizations and communities through
  Emergency Services and Public Safety grant programs. This includes the grants related to 2024
  Jasper Wildfire, 911 Call Centres Support, Policing Support Grant and Organized and Serious
  Crime.
• The remainder of ministry expenses were classified as amortization of tangible capital assets ($28.4
  million) and other expenses ($0.9 million).
• Inter-ministry elimination (-$11.1 million) for the services provided by Advanced Education for (-$5.8)
  million and Alberta Health Services for (-$5.1) million.


Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                             51
Financial Information




Supplemental Financial Information

Tangible Capital Assets (unaudited)


                               Net Book Value as of March 31, 2025
                                            In thousands



                                        Buildings,
                                         $128 ,
                                           0%                        Other,
                                                                     $344 ,
     Computer                                                         0%
     Hardware
       and
     Software,
     $15,290 ,
        7%




                                                                                   Equipment,
                                                                                   $209,242 ,
                                                                                      93%




• The ministry’s largest category of tangible capital assets, Equipment, represents 93 percent ($209.2)
  million of the Net Book Value (NBV). This category is primarily comprised of radio towers operated
  under Alberta First Responders Radio Communications System, vehicles, in-car video and
  distributed antenna system for the Public Security Division, and equipment's for corrections’
  program.




52                                             Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                              Financial Information




Other Financial Information

Table of Contents
        Disaster Recovery Program (unaudited) ................................................................................................. 55
        Statement of Credit or Recovery (unaudited)........................................................................................ 56
        Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited) .............................................................................................................. 57
        Payments Based on Agreements (unaudited) ....................................................................................... 59




Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                        53
Financial Information



Other Financial Information
Certain disclosures (unaudited) required by legislation and regulations, and financial information
relating to trust funds include the following where applicable:

     •   Disaster Recovery Program

In addition to the above, other schedules (unaudited) that form part of this section include the
following and the presentation:

     •   Statement of Credit or Recovery [FAA S.24(3)]

     •   Lapse / Encumbrance [FAA S.28(5) and 28.1(4)]

     •   Payments Based on Agreement [FAA S. 25(3)]




54                                              Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                            Financial Information


Disaster Recovery Program (unaudited)
Department of Public Safety and Emergency Services
For the year ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

The Disaster Recovery Program (DRP) is administered by the Alberta Emergency Management
Agency (AEMA). AEMA is part of the Alberta Public Safety and Emergency Services. Alberta
Regulation 51/94 of the Alberta Emergency Management Act allows the province to provide
disaster recovery assistance to residents, small business, agriculture operations, and provincial and
municipal governments if the event meets the criteria as outlined in the regulation.

The Ministry recognizes the DRP expense when the Government of Alberta (GoA) issues a
Ministerial Order.

The Ministry recognizes Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements (DFAA) revenue when the
Government of Canada (GoC) issues an Order in Council (OiC) declaring the Alberta disaster to be of
a concern to the GoC. The estimated DFAA revenue is determined by assessing eligible DRP
expenses under the DFAA guidelines. As a result, some DRP expenses are excluded when
calculating the estimated DFAA revenue.

The Ministry will continue to pursue revenue from the GoC for expenses that are excluded from the
estimated DFAA calculation.

The following schedule lists disasters being administered by AEMA at March 31, 2025:
                                                                                             Total
                                                Total
                                                                                          Projected      Advances/
                                              Projected    Payments to      Accrued                                      Accounts
                                                                                            DFAA         Payments
                                                DRP           Date         Liabilities                                  Receivable
                                       GoC                                               Revenue (1)    Received (3)
                                             Expense (1)
   Disaster                            OiC                                                    (2)
2013 Southern Alberta Flood DRP        162     1,371,529       1,371,212           317        968,236        600,000         368,236
2014 Southwestern Alberta DRP          181        19,304          19,304             -          1,007               -          1,007
2016 Wood Buffalo Wildfire DRP         197       511,446         511,339           107        405,136        307,000          98,136
2018 Spring Flood DRP                  218        31,347          25,039         6,308          4,553               -          4,553
2019 Northwest Alberta Wildfires DRP   222        67,822          66,228         1,594         28,173         16,164          12,009
2020 Northern Alberta Floods DRP       232       174,817         136,051        38,766         56,960         27,151          29,809
2023 Alberta Spring Wildfire           258       175,127          63,180       111,947         69,764               -         69,764
2023 North Central Flood               271        67,988           7,028        60,960          4,969               -          4,969
2024 Municipality of Jasper DRP        278       148,793          38,224       110,569         58,014         19,570          38,444
2024 RMWB DRP                          278         2,800             109         2,691          1,733               -          1,733
Other DRPs (4)                          -         58,719          41,073        17,646              -               -              -
March 31, 2025                               $ 2,629,692   $   2,278,787   $   350,905    $ 1,598,545   $   969,885     $    628,660

March 31, 2024                               $ 2,518,742   $   2,196,465   $   322,277    $1,463,132        $950,316        $512,816



(1) DRP expense and DFAA revenue are calculated based on management estimates. The projected DRP
expenses and DFAA revenue are adjusted to reflect management's best estimate of the remaining obligations
of the DRP and expected DFAA revenue.

(2) A province or territory may request GoC disaster financial assistance when eligible expenditures exceed
an established initial threshold based on the provincial or territorial population.

(3) The GoC may provide advance payments to provincial and territorial governments as funds are expended
under the provincial/territorial DRP.

(4) "Other DRPs" includes DRPs with accrual balances or transactions during the 2024/25 fiscal year that are
DFAA ineligible.



Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                    55
Financial Information


Statement of Credit or Recovery (unaudited)

Department of Public Safety and Emergency Services
For the year ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

                                                                                             2025

                                                                            Actual                        Total Revenue
                                                           Authorized      Revenue       Unearned           Received/       (Shortfall)/
                                                            Spending      Recognized     Revenue           Receivable        Excess (1)
     EXPENSE AMOUNTS                                                                     In thousands
       Edmonton Regional Airports Authority Policing
       Services Agreement (3)                          $        4,180 $        4,524 $              - $           4,524 $            344
       Credit or Recovery (Shortfall)                  $        4,180 $        4,524 $              - $           4,524 $            344   (2)




      (1) Shortfall is deducted from current year’s corresponding funding authority

      (2) The revenue of each credit or recovery is included in the Statement of Revenues and Expenses

      (3) Edmonton Regional Airport Authority Policing Services Agreement revenues are received on a full
          cost recovery basis from the Edmonton Regional Airport Authority for policing services provided to
          the Edmonton International Airport under the Provincial Police Service Agreement.




56                                                                Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                                                                        Financial Information


Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited)

Department of Public Safety and Emergency Services
For the year ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

The following has been prepared pursuant to Section 24(4) of the Financial Administration Act.



                                                                                                                   Adjusted                               Over
                                                                     Voted         Supplementary                    Voted               Voted           Expended
                                                                   Estimate (1)     Estimate (2) Adjustments (3)   Estimate            Actuals (4)    (Unexpended)

EXPENSE VOTE BY PROGRAM
   Ministry Support Services
         1.1 Minister's Office                                     $        913    $            -   $         -    $        913    $            901   $        (12)
         1.2 Deputy Minister's Office                                       925                 -             -             925                 901            (24)
         1.3 Corporate Services                                           8,660                               -           8,660               7,462         (1,198)
                                                                         10,498                 -             -          10,498               9,264         (1,234)

    Public Security
          2.1 Alberta Sheriffs                                          136,738                -         (1,050)        135,688             139,365          3,677
          2.2 Alberta Serious Incident Response Team                      5,734                -              -           5,734               6,305            571
          2.3 Provincial Security Intelligence Office                     1,972                -              -           1,972               2,582            610
          2.4 Law Enforcement Oversight                                  29,724                -              -          29,724              14,614        (15,110)
          2.5 Contract Policing and Policing Oversight                  391,452                -              -         391,452             391,683            231
          2.6 Indigenous Policing Services                               22,539                -              -          22,539              21,095         (1,444)
          2.7 Policing Support Grant                                    108,819                -              -         108,819             114,314          5,495
          2.8 Organized and Serious Crime                                66,316            2,121              -          68,437              71,612          3,175
                                                                        763,294            2,121         (1,050)        764,365             761,570         (2,795)

    Correctional Services
          3.1 Correctional Planning and Innovation                        5,133                               -           5,133               3,981         (1,152)
          3.2 Custody Operations                                        265,480                               -         265,480             269,110          3,630
          3.3 Community Corrections                                      57,031                               -          57,031              52,873         (4,158)
          3.4 Correctional Programs and Services                         13,730                 -             -          13,730              12,471         (1,259)
          3.5 Training Academy                                            7,321                               -           7,321               7,189           (132)
                                                                        348,695                 -             -         348,695             345,624         (3,071)

    Alberta Emergency Management Agency
          4.1 Managing Director’s Office                                    617                 -             -             617               1,205            588
          4.2 Strategy and Systems Support                               23,981                               -          23,981              22,912         (1,069)
          4.3 Operations                                                  9,330                -              -           9,330               9,285            (45)
          4.4 Recovery Operations                                         2,397           43,358              -          45,755               2,521        (43,234)
          4.5 Disaster Recovery                                               -                -              -               -              28,392         28,392
                                                                         36,325           43,358              -          79,683              64,315        (15,368)

    Strategy, Support and Integrated initiatives
          5.1 Strategic Policy and Planning                               2,699                 -             -           2,699               3,559            860
          5.2 Community and Public Safety Services                       14,581                 -             -          14,581              12,323         (2,258)
          5.3 Information Technology, Research and Modernization          3,124                 -             -           3,124               3,239            115
                                                                         20,404                 -             -          20,404              19,121         (1,283)

    Total                                                              1,179,216          45,479         (1,050)       1,223,645          1,199,894        (23,751)
    Credit or Recovery Shortfall                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                   $ 1,179,216     $      45,479    $    (1,050) $ 1,223,645       $      1,199,894   $    (23,751)
    Lapse                                                                                                                                             $    (23,751)




Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                                                  57
Financial Information


Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited-cont’d)

Department of Public Safety and Emergency Services
For the year ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

                                                                                             Adjusted                             Over
                                                Voted        Supplementary                    Voted            Voted            Expended
                                              Estimate (1)    Estimate (2) Adjustments (3)   Estimate         Actuals (4)     (Unexpended)
CAPITAL INVESTMENT VOTE BY PROGRAM
   Ministry Support Services                  $         -    $            -   $         -    $        -   $             153 $          153
   Public Security                                  8,695                 -         1,050         9,745                6001         (3,744)
   Correctional Services                            1,280                 -           292         1,572               1,448           (124)
   Alberta Emergency Management Agency              2,300                 -         2,401         4,701               2,805         (1,895)

     Total                                         12,275                 -         3,743        16,018             10,408          (5,610)
     Credit or Recovery Shortfall                                                       -             -                                  -
                                              $    12,275    $            -   $     3,743    $   16,018   $         10,408    $     (5,610)
     Lapse                                                                                                                    $     (5,610)

FINANCIAL TRANSACTIONS VOTE BY PROGRAM

     Alberta Emergency Management Agency
     Recovery Operations                      $    15,440    $            -   $         -    $   15,440   $           6,817 $       (8,623)
     Disaster Recovery                             36,000                 -             -        36,000               25591        (10,409)

     Total                                         51,440                 -             -        51,440             25,591         (19,032)
     Credit or Recovery Shortfall                                                       -             -                                  -
                                              $    51,440    $            -   $         -    $   51,440   $         25,591    $    (19,032)
     Lapse                                                                                                                    $    (19,032)

CONTINGENCY
OPERATING EXPENSE
   Policing Support Grant                     $          -   $            -   $     8,400    $    8,400   $           8,400   $          -
   Recovery Operations                                   -                -         9,442         9,442               9,442              -
   Disaster Recovery                                     -                -         5,500         5,500                   -         (5,500)

Capital Grants
   Indigenous Policing services               $          -   $            -   $       780    $      780   $            780    $          -
   Credit or Recovery Shortfall                          -                              -             -                  -               -
                                              $          -   $            -   $    24,122    $   24,122   $         18,622    $     (5,500)
     Lapse                                                                                                                    $     (5,500)



(1) As per “Expense Vote by Program”, “Capital Investment Vote by Program” and “Financial Transactions
    Vote by Program”, page 177-185 of 2024-25 Government Estimates on February 29, 2024.

(2) Per the Supplementary Supply Estimates approved on March 20, 2025.

(3) Adjustments include encumbrances, capital carry forward amounts, transfers between votes, credit or
    recovery increases approved by Treasury Board, and credit or recovery shortfalls. An encumbrance is
    incurred when, on a vote-by-vote basis, the total of actual disbursements in the prior year exceed the
    total adjusted estimate. All calculated encumbrances from the prior year are reflected as an adjustment
    to reduce the corresponding voted estimate in the current year. Adjustments also include supply vote
    transfers for "Contingency" as approved by the Lieutenant Governor in Council under the direction of
    the Minister of Finance. The Contingency supply vote consists of a provisional funding authority
    transferable to any ministry. Upon approval by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, the President of
    Treasury Board and Minister of Finance may either spend or transfer all or a portion of this supply vote
    to another Minister for public emergencies, disasters or unanticipated costs.

(4) Actuals exclude non-voted amounts as no cash disbursement is required (non-cash amounts), or because
    the Legislative Assembly has already provided the funding authority pursuant to a statute other than an
    appropriation act. Non-cash amounts (such as amortization, accretion, valuation adjustments, and other
    provisions) are excluded as these amounts do not require any expenditure or payment of public money.
    Year-end expense accruals & payables which will immediately require a cash outlay (payment of public
    money) to settle or otherwise extinguish the liabilities are included in Actuals.



58                                                    Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                  Financial Information



Payments Based on Agreements (unaudited)

Department of Public Safety and Emergency Services
For the year ended March 31, 2025
(in thousands)

The Department has entered into agreements to deliver programs and services that are fully funded
by the Government of Yukon Territory (Yukon) and the Government of Canada (GC). Costs based on
these agreements are incurred by the Department under authority in Section 25 of the Financial
Administration Act. Accounts Receivable includes $49 (2024 - $58) from Yukon, and ($970) (2024 –
$792) from the GC relating to payments based on agreements.

The agreement with the Yukon is for the purpose of conducting investigations of Serious Incidents
respecting members of the Territorial Police Service.

The agreements with the Government of Canada are to deliver the Alberta First Nations Emergency
Management Support Program.

Amounts paid and payable based on agreements with program sponsors are as follows:




The Department has also entered into an agreement to disburse the provincial share of net
forfeitures from proceeds of crime on behalf of the Department of Justice Canada (Justice Canada).
Proceeds received from Justice Canada under this agreement are in accordance with Section 10 of
the Federal Seized Property Management Act resulting from the investigation efforts by law
enforcement agencies in Alberta.

Disbursements to law enforcement agencies and crime and drug prevention organizations based on
this agreement are made by the Department under authority in Section 25 of the Financial
Administration Act. Only the amounts received from Justice Canada and not disbursed are reflected
in these financial statements. For the year ended March 31, 2025, amounts payable to law
enforcement agencies and crime and drug prevention organizations under this agreement are
$2,991 (2024 - $2,466) and are reflected in the Statement of Financial Position.




Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                      59
Annual Report Extracts and Other Statutory Reports (Unaudited)
The Criminal Code requires the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Services to report annually
on the following parts of the Act.

Criminal Code s.83.3 (3) – Anti-Terrorism Act

In accordance with subsection 83.3(4) of the Criminal Code, a peace officer who suspects, on
reasonable grounds, that the detention of a person is necessary to prevent a terrorist activity, may
arrest the person without a warrant.

Pursuant to subsection 83.31(3) of the Criminal Code, the minister responsible for policing in every
province shall publish or otherwise make available to the public an annual report for the previous
year on the operation of subsection 83.3 of the Criminal Code that includes:

      •   The number of arrests without warrant that were made under subsection 83.3(4) and
          the period of the arrested person’s detention in custody in each case; and
      •   The number of cases in which a person was arrested without warrant under subsection
          83.3(4) and was released.

Information has been received from all police services in Alberta indicating that no arrests without
a warrant were made under this subsection in the previous year; therefore, the report for 2024 is
zero.

Criminal Code s.25.3 – Organized Crime and Law Enforcement – Designations

Section 25.3 of the Criminal Code provides a limited justification for otherwise illegal acts and
omissions by law enforcement officers, and others acting at their discretion. An essential condition
is that it can apply only to officers designated by a competent authority. In the case of municipal
police services, the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Services is the competent authority.

The competent authority is responsible for publishing an annual report on the designations and
authorizations provided under subsections 24.1 to 25.4 of the Criminal Code. This report shall
include information on the amount and nature of the acts or omissions committed by those officers
designated under this legislation.

Alberta began designating officers under this legislation in March 2003. The designations for
January 1 to December 31, 2024 include:

      •   Number of times that acts and omissions were committed: Two (2)
      •   Nature of conduct being investigated: Fraud and illicit tobacco trade (One) and Homicide
          (One).
      •   Nature of act or omission: Section 121.1 Criminal Code - Sell, offer, trade a tobacco
          product not stamped. Section 380(1)(b) Criminal Code - Fraud under $5000. Section
          430(1)(b) Criminal Code - Mischief under $5000/ rendering property inoperative or
          ineffective.




60                                              Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
                                                                                      Financial Information


Public Interest Disclosure (Whistleblower Protection) Act

Section 32 of the Public Disclosure (Whistleblower Protection) Act requires the chief officer of a
department to report annually on all disclosures made to the designated officer of the department,
public entity or office of the legislature for which the chief officer is responsible.

This constitutes the annual report of the chief officer of the department covering the period of
April 1, 2024 to March 31, 2025.

Chief Officer Report as at March 31, 2024

In relation to the reporting requirements under section 32 of the Public Interest Disclosure
(Whistleblower Protection) Act, designations for April 1, 2024 to March 31, 2025 include:
       •     Number of disclosures of wrongdoing: zero
       •     Number of investigations and reports submitted: zero
       •     Number of wrongdoings identified: zero


Ministry Response to Recommendations from the Office of the Child and Youth Advocate

In response to a recommendation from the Office of the Child and Youth Advocate (OCYA), the
Correctional Services Division (CSD) has committed to public annual reporting of emergency
incidents that required the use of Oleoresin Capsicum spray (OC spray) and incidents where
administrative placement was required within a provincial young offender centre.

For the period of April 1, 2024 through March 31, 2025, CSD reports the following:

  I.       Total Number of Incidents of OC Spray Deployment in Provincial Young Offender
           Centres

The use of OC spray is based on a variety of exceptional circumstances that are unique to each
situation. It is only used when all lesser use of force options are exhausted, and to reduce the
likelihood of injury or harm for young person(s) and staff involved. Data is collapsed to the
provincial level, in order to protect the privacy of youths involved in the OC spray incidents. Also, to
protect the privacy of the youth involved, the number of OC spray incidents in young offender
centres is not reported when fewer than six instances have occurred. For the 2024-25 fiscal year,
25 incidents of OC spray occurred within provincial young offender centres.

 II.       Secure Separation in Provincial Young Offender Centres

In 2024-25, CSD focused on refining the methodology used to assess and monitor the use of secure
separation of young persons in correctional facilities. This work is essential to ensure that future
reporting is accurate, consistent, and meaningful. Prior work has focused on implementing changes
to policies and practices related to the segregation of youth in correctional facilities. These updates
introduced standards for secure separation that align with trauma-informed practices. Key changes
included clearer parameters for confinement conditions, revised review protocols, and a new case
conference mechanism to guide responses to behavioral incidents.




Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025                                          61
