Results Analysis



department visits, hospitalizations, and prescription drug dispensations for mental health or
addiction issues) in the previous two fiscal years.

Rationale: A decreasing score over time suggests improvement, indicating that individuals’ needs
are being addressed in the community, reducing reliance on the emergency department for
delivery of mental health and addiction related services.

Results and variance explanation: The result for this measure was 19.7 per cent in 2023-24,
which is 1.8 percentage points above the target of 17.9 per cent and only 0.2 percentage points
above the 2022-23 result of 19.5 per cent. Results from the previous fiscal years demonstrate a
gradual decreasing pattern.

The difference between the 2023-24 target and the actual result could reflect variation over time.
However, insufficient workforce support and capacity at the community level, along with barriers
affecting treatment and referral pathways from police services to mental health and addiction care,
could contribute to an increasing number of Albertans seeking emergency department care for
their mental health and addiction-related concerns. Alberta also experienced a record population
growth from April 2023 to April 2024, the highest among Canadian provinces, primarily driven by
immigration, which may have contributed to increased demand for health care services, including a
rise in emergency department visits for mental health and addiction needs.

The results for this measure from 2019-20 to 2023-24 have underscored the actual need for mental
health and addiction service use. Overall health care use decreased during the COVID-19 pandemic,
with a considerable decrease in physician visits and hospitalizations among individuals with
mental health and addiction issues. Natural disasters like wildfires and other emergency events
also impacted mental health and addiction needs, leading to an increase in emergency department
visits for such conditions. In addition, there are rural and remote areas in Alberta where mental
health and addiction services are not readily available in the community, leading residents in these
areas to rely on the emergency department for their mental health and addiction concerns.

Performance Indicator 1.b:
     Percentage of Albertans receiving care at an appropriate level (under development)

The performance indicator on the percentage of Albertans receiving care at an appropriate level
was originally designed to demonstrate how investment and cost-avoidance across multiple
systems can reduce the need for more costly and less effective interventions, but over time, this
indicator has evolved. In previous years, significant work was undertaken to explore the
development of a more meaningful measure of system impact, including leveraging the expertise of
the Recovery Expert Advisory Panel. The focus shifted in 2023-24 to better capture clients’
interactions with different programs, aiming to develop metrics that more effectively reflect the
holistic impact of the Alberta Recovery Model. Although the ministry conducted a preliminary
analysis of available data, this work was limited by legislative and privacy constraints.

In 2024-25, the performance indicator remained unchanged, consistent with a broader shift toward
long-term planning and system-wide improvements in performance measurement. Like 2023-24,
the analysis focused on VODP, drug consumption services, bed-based addiction services, and
mental health-related hospital admissions.

As part of the ministry’s ongoing evolution and maturation of performance measurement, this
indicator has been discontinued and will be replaced in 2025-26 with a new performance measure:
the percentage of individuals primarily admitted for more than 30 days to hospital inpatient care
for a mental health issue, which is more aligned with the outcome (Outcome 1 in the 2025-28
Business Plan). By focusing on hospital inpatient admissions over 30 days, the new indicator allows


34                                                    Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
