Results Analysis



In response to the Jasper wildfire relief efforts, funding was provided to Little Red River Cree
Nation through the Honouring Life Program to support activities intended to:

• Bring community members together and provide cultural learning opportunities to help build
     their sense of community and connection.
• Support community members’ mental wellness during the evacuation period.
• Provide opportunities for Elders and youth to connect and find joy and strength in Cree
     language and culture.

All activities were led by Elders and Knowledge Keepers. The impact of these activities included
creating a sense of community and learning about the strength of Cree culture and teachings.
During stressful and difficult times, the activities allowed youth and community members to
connect with Elders and each other, and to share emotional difficulties while providing support to
others. The cultural workshops and activities provided an opportunity for community members to
spend time away from crowded evacuation centres and offered a distraction from the realities of
evacuation from their homes and community and feelings of isolation and hopelessness. Multiple
workshops and activities were offered in locations where members were evacuated.

Performance Indicator 2.a:
     Recovery-supportive community scores for selected Alberta communities (under
     development)

In 2024-25 the work on this performance measure was put on hold due to several limitations such
as costly methodology, lack of historical data for system linkages and trend analysis, and the risk of
unrepresentative samples. The ministry remains committed to exploring opportunities to measure
and understand community support for recovery.

Going forward, performance metrics for the community-focused outcome (Outcome 3 in the
2025-28 Mental Health and Addiction Business Plan) include:

• Mental health and addiction emergency department visits, which reflects the benefit of
     individual Albertans’ improved access to community-based mental health and addiction
     programs and services.
• Operational and newly created mental health and addiction facilities, which demonstrates the
     progress and success of targeted strategies to build mental health and addiction system capacity
     and improve the availability of supports and services for Albertans pursuing recovery.




44                                                      Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
