Results Analysis



                        • Assessing the impact of urban-focused initiatives on the health care and
                            correctional systems and perceptions of safety in downtown areas of Calgary
                            and Edmonton (initiated in 2024-25, continuing into 2025-26).
                        • Building insights about Alberta’s addiction and mental health initiatives
                            through creative use of cross-government and partner data holdings.

Comprehensive data linking is subject to legislative and privacy-based constraints, which must be
considered and navigated. In 2024-25, the department, CoRE, and Recovery Alberta became full
custodians of relevant health administrative data under the Health Information Act to guarantee
consistent data flows to meet the data needs of the ministry. The ministry also made progress on
several important initiatives aimed at improving data quality to better inform decision making and
policy development to advance the Alberta Recovery Model. All identified initiatives will continue
into 2025-26.

• Exploring opportunities to align grant agreement reporting requirements with
     recovery-oriented outcomes to demonstrate programs and services’ effectiveness in supporting
     the Alberta Recovery Model.
• Conducting data linkage for health service utilization among navigation centre clients in
     collaboration with Recovery Alberta and Seniors, Community and Social Services to understand
     their mental health and addiction-related needs, and identify potential service gaps to facilitate
     coordinated decision-making, policy development, and program implementation within and
     across ministries.
• Transitioning the Alberta Substance Use Surveillance System (ASUSS) from Alberta Health to the
     department to enable full access to timely substance use data for faster and accurate responses
     and ensuring availability of data for surveillance purposes.

ASUSS—accessible through https://www.alberta.ca/substance-use-surveillance-data—is a
publicly available online reporting dashboard containing point in time, comprehensive
system-level population data related to substance use in Alberta, including opioid and other
substance-related deaths, Emergency Medical Services (EMS) responses to opioid-related events,
naloxone kit distribution, hospitalizations and emergency department visits, and high-level details
about location of overdose deaths. ASUSS data helps the ministry monitor and analyze trends
related to the Alberta Recovery Model to understand whether desired outcomes are being
achieved. It also provides valuable insight that informs the ministry’s decision making and strategic
direction regarding supports for individuals experiencing addiction. The trends observed in Alberta
are regularly compared with trends observed in other jurisdictions to provide an understanding of
addiction challenges on a broader scale. While it is still early in the health care system
transformation, data from ASUSS is demonstrating positive trends for several key system
indicators, for example, in the 2024 calendar year:

• Recovery Alberta’s opioid dependency program supported a record number of nearly
     12,300 unique clients, including VODP, compared to almost 11,500 unique clients in 2023,
     an increase of seven per cent.
• Opioid deaths per 100,000 population decreased by 37 per cent compared to 2023.
• Deaths from methamphetamine, alcohol and cocaine were down significantly compared to 2023.
• Opioid-related emergency department visits declined by 26 per cent and the number of opioid-
     related hospitalizations reduced by 16 per cent compared to 2023.




26                                                        Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025
