                                                                                                             Results Analysis



the system to better assess whether individuals are receiving timely, appropriate care in the
community—before their needs escalate to the point of requiring prolonged hospitalization.

As Alberta continues to build a recovery-oriented system of care, efforts to reduce barriers to data
access are expected to support more holistic analyses of client pathways and outcomes across
sectors. This will strengthen the ministry’s ability to evaluate the long-term impact of
recovery-focused policies and programs in areas such as health, justice, education, and housing.
Over time, improved data integration may also support a better understanding of how individuals’
access and interact with services, contributing to more coordinated, person-centred care.

Preliminary results: In 2024-25, 17,335 Albertans received care from one or more of VODP, drug
consumption services, and bed-based addiction services—an increase of 1,237 individuals or
7.7 per cent, compared to 2023-24 (16,098 individuals). The increase may reflect reduced financial
barriers, greater public awareness, and the expansion and specialization of programs offering more
opportunities and individualized services. Bed-based addiction services comprise three distinct
services: withdrawal management, residential (intensive) treatment and residential recovery
services. In 2024-25, bed-based addiction services had the most clients, followed by VODP. Of the
clients enrolled and discharged from VODP, nearly 28 per cent were transitioned to another Opioid
Dependency Program (ODP) clinic and/or another prescriber within 30 days of discharge. This
represents a decrease of five percentage points compared to the previous year, when 33 per cent of
clients were transitioned. Such fluctuations can be expected, as clients may choose to transition
their care to their family physician or primary care provider instead of another ODP clinic or may
choose to transition to non-pharmaceutical treatment options. Data about drug consumption
services has some limitations because Personal Health Number (PHN) disclosure by a client is not
required to access these services, therefore clients who do not produce a validated PHN are
excluded from the data used for the analysis. However, PHN data quality has improved over recent
years, with PHN being provided nearly 90 per cent of the time, supporting more reliable reporting.

The Mental Health Act enables care for individuals with serious mental health illnesses who are at
significant risk of causing harm to themselves and/or to others. In 2024-25, the proportion of
individuals admitted three times or more to a hospital under the Mental Health Act was 7 per cent3
compared to 8.7 per cent4 in 2023-24—a decrease of 1.7 percentage points. The decrease could
suggest that more accessible and effective mental health care with appropriate prevention and
intervention supports are available in the community and barriers to access to care are being
reduced. The metric is included as performance indicator 4.a in the 2025-28 Mental Health and
Addiction Business Plan and will be reported on in detail in the ministry’s 2025-26 Annual Report.

In 2024-25, the proportion of individuals primarily admitted for more than 30 days to hospital
inpatient care for a mental health issue also decreased. This is a broader segment of people that is
not specific to admission through the Mental Health Act. The proportion of patients who had a
length of stay of more than 30 days for a mental health-related illness decreased from 16.9 per
cent4 in 2023-24 to 13.9 per cent3 in 2024-25. This decrease may reflect the positive effects of
enhanced community-based care and improved coordination between hospital and community
services, leading to more effective care and fewer long hospital stays. This metric is included as
performance measure 1.a in the 2025-28 Mental Health and Addiction Business Plan and will be
reported on in detail in the ministry’s 2025-26 Annual Report.




3 Figures reflects data available as of April 2, 2025, and may change once the full data set is available in June 2025.
4 Figure as been updated based on the release of additional data and does not match what was presented in the

2023-24 Mental Health and Addiction Annual Report.


Mental Health and Addiction | Annual Report 2024–2025                                                                     35
