Results Analysis




Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology
Performance Measure 1.a:
     Median time from intake to resolution of Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods
     (SCAN) complaints

Source: Public Safety and Emergency Services Administrative Data, Public Security Division.

Methodology: the measure monitors the timeliness and overall efficiency of the Alberta Sheriffs’
Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods (SCAN) unit in keeping Albertan communities safe by
dealing with problem properties used for illegal activities such as drug trafficking, prostitution,
child exploitation and gang-related crime.

The measure is calculated by comparing the date a complaint is received to the date a resolution is
made, which results in the ‘time to resolution’, and then the median of all the times to resolution
indicates the performance, as shown in the equation below:

                              Median time from intake to resolution =
                       Median (Number of days from intake to resolution for
                               each SCAN complaint in the fiscal year)

The overall objective of the measure is to contribute to community safety and minimize negative
impacts of problem properties with quicker file resolutions. The impacts to a family living near a
drug house are significant and saving a family from enduring this type of activity for even one less
day is a huge contribution to public safety.

The expansion of SCAN by 20 investigators directly impacts the files that were previously
unassigned, which in turn directly reduced the amount of time it takes to resolve a complaint. In
addition, the time it takes to resolve a complaint can vary depending on how complex the case is,
changes in its status, the timing of external hearings, and the specific steps needed to complete the
investigation. To improve outcomes, the ministry is enhancing SCAN operations by adding staff and
strengthening partnerships with RCMP and municipal police services.

Performance Indicator 1.a:
     Violent and property crime rates per 100,000 population

Source: Uniform Crime Reporting Survey, Canadian Centre for Justice and Community Safety
Statistics (CCJCSS). Data is available annually. CCJCSS Table data was available in July 2024.

Methodology: crime rate is calculated using incident-based Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR2) data,
which measures police-reported crime in each Canadian jurisdiction. Crime rate measures the
volume of police-reported crime, expressed as the number of crimes per 100,000 people. Historical
results are revised annually to reflect updated data provided by police services for incidents that
occurred in previous years. Property crime includes theft, break and enter, fraud and possession of
stolen goods. It does not include the use of threat of violence against an individual. Violent crime
includes homicide, attempted murder, robbery, abduction and various forms of sexual assault. It
does not include traffic incidents that result in death or bodily harm.




42                                              Public Safety and Emergency Services | Annual Report 2024–2025
