16
2020-21 Final Results | Year-End Report
Each year, the Government of Alberta 
releases a multi-year Capital Plan 
outlining capital spending to support the 
infrastructure that individual Albertans, 
families and communities need.
The Annual Infrastructure Report 
captures the completion of capital 
projects and highlights the progress on 
capital projects over the past fiscal year.
During 2020-21, the world faced an 
economic crisis due to the COVID-19 
pandemic that shut down economic 
activity and travel and severely hampered 
energy markets, resulting in a significant 
drop in oil prices. The global recession 
and oil price collapse hit Alberta’s 
resource-based economy harder than 
other jurisdictions. 
Alberta’s government responded to the 
pandemic with a variety of significant 
initiatives aimed at protecting lives 
and livelihoods. In June 2020, Alberta’s 
Recovery Plan was announced, with 
a focus of stimulating economic 
activity, diversifying the economy, 
and supporting job creation. The Plan 
includes specific sector strategies, 
and a number of strategic 
infrastructure projects. 
The Budget 2020 Capital Plan was 
revised substantially as the government 
acted quickly to support jobs and the 
economy, and began executing Alberta’s 
Recovery Plan. In 2020-21, Capital Plan 
spending was $6.9 billion, with $1.1 
billion added in response to COVID-19 
and in support of Alberta’s Recovery Plan. 
This included investment in capital 
maintenance and renewal projects, the 
start of strategic infrastructure projects, 
and economic stimulus funding 
for municipalities.
Over the course of 2020-21, many new 
and existing projects were underway to 
build, maintain and renew infrastructure 
across the province, while other projects 
reached completion. These projects 
support a range of jobs related to the 
planning, design, building and service 
delivery of this infrastructure.
This included completion of 20 new 
school projects, 111 road and bridge 
projects with 830 kilometers of road 
rehabilitated, and 705 housing units, as 
well as continued progress on five new 
health facility projects.
The Budget 2020 Capital Plan provided 
funding for new projects such as the 
Bow Reservoir Options Project, the 
Alberta Surgical Initiative Capital 
Program, the Northern Laboratory 
Equipment Upgrade Program, and the 
Red Deer Integrated Emergency Shelter.
Other major projects that continue to be 
underway include the Calgary Cancer 
Centre, a new Edmonton hospital, the 
Peter Lougheed Centre Emergency 
Department upgrades, province-
wide school projects, the Edmonton 
and Calgary light rail transit (LRT), 
Deerfoot Trail Upgrades, Highway 15 
bridge and twinning, and Highway 40 
bridge and twinning. 
Alberta’s 
Recovery Plan
Alberta’s Recovery Plan initiatives totalled 
$1.1 billion in 2020-21.
Because the projects were shovel-ready, 
immediate action was taken to maintain 
Alberta’s existing infrastructure with 
$685 million accelerated for Capital 
Maintenance and Renewal (CMR) 
projects and pothole repairs. These 
projects commenced in 2020-21, with 
$475 million spent during the fiscal 
year. The remaining $210 million of 
accelerated CMR projects started in 
2020-21, will be completed in 2021-22. 
Municipalities received additional 
support for their infrastructure 
projects, with $500 million added 
to the Capital Plan in 2020-21 for 
economic stimulus. Some of the projects 
municipalities utilized the funding 
towards include: improvements to 
storm water community drainage and 
flood mitigation in Calgary and Wood 
Buffalo, construction of the Carseland 
Fire Hall in Wheatland County, a 
broadband internet initiative to expand 
and construct fibre optic internet 
infrastructure in Red Deer County, and 
the renewal, upgrade and construction 
of affordable housing units and new 
modular homes in Edmonton. Another 
$109 million supported grants for water 
and resilience projects, and $19 million 
on transportation programs across the 
province. As well, $46 million was spent 
on critical COVID-19 health-related 
equipment. 
In addition, several key strategic 
infrastructure projects across the 
province were added to the multi-
year Capital Plan to support recovery, 
diversification and create future 
opportunities. Over the next several 
years these key strategic projects will 
commence construction. The Budget 
2020 Select Ongoing and Completed 
Projects map on page 20 provides a 
listing of these strategic projects initiated 
as part of Alberta’s Recovery Plan, and 
their specific locations across Alberta.
Capital Plan 
Initiatives Update
During 2020-21, progress was 
made on several important 
Capital Plan initiatives:
•	 Alberta Infrastructure Act
	- Work continued on the Alberta 
Infrastructure Act, which will 
legislate increased transparency 
and require rigorous prioritization 
criteria to be used for decision-
making based on long-term 
strategic planning. Passing the act 
will raise the bar in how projects 
are evaluated, by defining a more 
systematic approach to guide 
decision-making.
•	 20-Year Strategic Capital Plan
	- Development of a 20-Year Strategic 
Capital Plan will also support 
long-term planning and set a 
medium- to long-term vision 
for the government’s overall 
infrastructure needs and 
strategic investments.
•	 Capital Maintenance and 
Renewal Process
	- As part of the Budget 2021 capital 
planning process, further rigor 
and transparency was added to the 
Annual Infrastructure Report
