
9
2024-25 Final Results | Year-End Report
Fiscal Framework
The Sustainable Fiscal Planning and 
Reporting Act includes a no deficit rule. 
In 2024-25 the government is reporting 
a surplus of $8.3 billion. 
The framework also limits in-year 
expense increases, adjusted to exclude 
expense that is directly offset by a related 
increase to revenue and non-cash, 
non-recurring adjustments, to the voted, 
budgeted contingency. In 2024-25, the 
contingency was set at $2 billion.
In 2024-25, total expense exceeded 
budget by $1 billion. Of this increase, 
$2 billion was offset by the contingency. 
The remaining increase was mainly 
in disaster and emergency assistance 
expense relating to drought and wildfires 
in 2024 and expense related to dedicated 
revenue. The fiscal framework provides 
allowable exceptions for the in-year 
expense limitation, including exceptions 
for disasters and emergencies and 
dedicated-revenue expense.
Surplus cash and Alberta Fund. 
The fiscal framework requires the 
allocation of surplus cash, with the first 
50 per cent going to repay maturing 
debt or to the Alberta Heritage Savings 
Trust Fund to improve the province’s 
net financial position and the remaining 
50 per cent allocated to the Alberta 
Fund. There are three allowable uses 
of cash from the Alberta Fund: further 
debt repayment, savings in the Alberta 
Heritage Savings Trust Fund or for one-
time initiatives that do not permanently 
increase government spending. 
Surplus cash at March 31, 2025 of 
$5.1 billion is comprised of $3.7 billion 
of surplus cash from 2023-24 results, 
plus the $8.3 billion surplus, less 
$4.9 billion in cash requirements and 
adjustments. Preliminary allocations 
of surplus cash from 2024-25 results 
include $2.6 billion to improve the 
government’s net financial position either 
through debt repayment or deposits 
into the Heritage Fund and $2.6 billion 
to the Alberta Fund. These allocations 
are preliminary and may change as the 
2025-26 fiscal year unfolds.
As stated in Budget 2024, the 
government transferred $2 billion from 
the 2023-24 Alberta Fund allocation 
into the Heritage Fund to support the 
long-term plan to grow the size of 
the fund. 
Cash adjustments such as differences 
between accrued revenue and cash 
receipts, non-cash revenue or expense, 
SUCH sector (schools, universities, 
colleges and health entities) and entity 
results, and transfers not reported on 
the income statement, are necessary to 
determine the cash balance. The list of 
cash adjustments are included on page 
10 of this report.
•	 Net income of, or retained by, 
other entities. 
	- Positive adjustments include: 
APMC had a net loss of $0.6 
billion from Sturgeon Refinery 
Processing Agreement primarily as 
a result of higher feedstock costs 
such as crude oil, and $0.1 billion 
as the Agriculture Financial Services 
Corporation (AFSC) funded 
indemnity payments from the 
crop fund and underutilized 
Affordable Housing Strategy 
funding in the Alberta Social 
Housing Corporation.
	- Negative adjustments include: 
$1.9 billion of net income was 
retained in the Alberta Heritage 
Savings Trust Fund; $0.3 billion 
of net income was retained in the 
endowment funds; $0.3 billion of 
net income was retained by ATB 
Financial; and $0.1 billion of net 
income was retained by the 
TIER Fund.
•	 Other cash adjustments.
	- Non-cash expense: An adjustment 
is required to remove the impact 
of SUCH related revenues and 
expenses as these are reported in 
the government’s consolidated 
reporting entity but are funded 
using the entity’s cash, a net 
adjustment of $0.3 billion in 
2024-25. Inventory consumption 
of $0.2 billion is an accounting 
adjustment and does not require 
cash. $0.4 billion adjustment for 
pension recovery is added back to 
cash balance as it is also non-cash. 
	- Cash requirements not in 
expense: $0.3 billion for student 
loans, net of repayments and 
default provision; $205 million for 
short-term inventory acquisition.
	- Revenue and other cash 
adjustments: non-renewable 
resource revenue reported was 
$0.6 billion less than cash received, 
income tax revenue reported was 
$0.5 billion less than cash received. 
$83 million is still outstanding in 
Federal Government transfers for 
disaster recovery assistance, 2016 
Wood Buffalo wildfire, 2024 Jasper 
Wildfires and other disasters where 
spending incurred in prior years. 
Cash transfers for capital, reported 
in revenue over the related asset’s 
life, exceeded non-cash reported 
revenue by $4 million.
•	 Capital Plan cash. Cash for capital 
investment and P3 principal 
repayments of $3.5 billion was slightly 
offset by the $4 million from P3 
partners and $1.3 billion in 
non-cash amortization. 
ATB Financial paid quarterly dividends 
totaling $0.1 billion to the province in 
2024-25.
