PDF PAGE 87
MEASURING UP	
85
Measuring Up 2017 provides performance results on government priorities, performance measures and indicators 
as identified in Budget 2016 – The Alberta Jobs Plan.  Budget 2016 focused on addressing the challenges Albertans 
face as a result of the steepest and most prolonged slide in oil prices in recent history by promoting economic 
diversification and job creation, supporting families in times of hardship and improving access to education and 
skills training while restraining the rate of growth in government operating expense.
The Government of Alberta (GoA) 2016-19 Strategic Plan, as part of Budget 2016, identified the following five 
strategic priorities, and associated performance measures and indicators, on which to assess the government’s 
performance over the 2016-17 fiscal year:
Strategic Priority 1
A diversified economy that creates jobs and opportunities for all Albertans
■
■Performance Measures (PM)
PM 1 - Alberta Enterprise Corporation (AEC) Funds 
PM 2 – Value of AEC Funds Invested 
PM 3 – Labour Force Participation - Interprovincial Rank 
PM 4 – Tourism Expenditures
PM 5 – Value-added Agricultural Products
■
■Performance Indicators (PI)
PI 1 – Labour Force Participation Rate – By Group 
PI 2 – Manufacturing, Business and Commercial Services Gross Domestic Product (GDP) Growth 
PI 3 – Licensing University Technology
PI 4 – Alberta Immigrant Nominee Program (AINP)
Strategic Priority 2
Demonstrated leadership on climate change
■
■Performance Measures (PM)
PM 1 – Energy Consumption 
PM 2 – Environmentally Sustainable Agriculture Practices 
PM 3 – Regulatory Compliance (Alberta Energy Regulator) 
PM 4 – Municipal Solid Waste to Landfills 
PM 5 – Municipal Client Satisfaction with Environmental Stewardship Grant Programs
■
■Performance Indicators (PI)
PI 1 – Total Greenhouse Gas Emissions
PI 2 – Provincial Air Quality Index
PI 3 – Alternative and Renewable Generation Capacity in Alberta
Strategic Priority 3
Education and training to enable Albertans to succeed in the global economy
■
■Performance Measures (PM)
PM 1 – High School Completion 
PM 2 – Post-secondary Transition 
PM 3 – Literacy 
PM 4 – Post-secondary Education 
PM 5 – Sponsored Research Revenue (SRR)
READERS’ GUIDE


PDF PAGE 88
86	
GOVERNMENT OF ALBERTA 2016 –17 ANNUAL REPORT
■
■Performance Indicators (PI)
PI 1 – International Literacy (15 years old) 
PI 2 – Total Research and Development 
Strategic Priority 4
Safe and inclusive communities that embrace fairness and equality of opportunity
■
■Performance Measures (PM)
PM 1 – Family Enhancement and Child Protection Services 
PM 2 – Family Violence and Bullying Awareness 
PM 3 – Maintenance Enforcement Payment Rate 
PM 4 – Indigenous Children in Care 
■
■Performance Indicators (PI)
PI 1 – Volunteerism 
PI 2 – Awareness of Elder Abuse 
PI 3 – Crime Severity Index 
PI 4 – Women’s Labour Force Participation 
Strategic Priority 5
Sustainable and accessible health care services and social supports
Performance Measures (PM)
PM 1 – Unplanned Readmissions of Mental Health Patients 
PM 2 – Access to Primary Care through Primary Care Networks 
PM 3 – Access to Continuing Care Spaces 
PM 4 – Influenza Immunization 
PM 5 – Family Support for Children and Disabilities Program 
■
■Performance Indicators (PI)
PI 1 – Health Expenditures 
PI 2 – Children Receiving Child Intervention Services as a Percentage of the Child Population 
Measuring Up 2017 provides a high-level overview of results achieved under the five strategic priorities, analysis for 
each of the 24 performance measures, and a description of each of the 15 performance indicators outlined in the 
strategic plan.
Each strategic priority in the strategic plan identified key actions and initiatives to be undertaken by government 
ministries. Results and performance information for these and other activities and initiatives, and for other 
performance measures and indicators, are outlined in more detail in ministry 2016-17 annual reports. Performance 
measures illustrate what progress is being achieved relative to the strategic priorities while indicators provide context 
and additional information about long-term desired outcomes.
Readers should note that performance measures and indicators reported in Measuring Up 2017 do not represent 
the current state of government policy. For the most recent measures and indicators readers should refer to the 
Government of Alberta 2017-20 Strategic Plan. Also, as noted in the Management’s Responsibility for Reporting on 
page 84, performance measures and indicators are selected based on their enduring nature to allow for comparability 
over time. 
With new and revised policies that have been implemented over the last 24 months, further work is underway to 
develop performance measures and indicators and solidify appropriate methodologies. Further, to conduct trend 
analysis and set appropriate targets for performance measures, data collection can take up to three years.


PDF PAGE 109
MEASURING UP	
107
3
1
PERFORMANCE MEASURE 
High School Completion
High school completion rate of students within five years of entering Grade 10
Source: Ministry of Education
Note(s): The most recent results are for 2015-16 as the data for this measure lag a year. Included in 
the calculation of high school completion rates is an estimated adjustment for attrition (i.e. students 
moving out of the province) using Statistics Canada estimates of out-migration. All results have been 
adjusted to reflect the change from previous data source systems to the Provincial Approach to Student 
Information.
For additional sources and notes see page 139
Results Analysis
The high school completion rate has improved over time and exceeded the target for 
2016-17.  Improving the high school completion rate continues to be a priority for the 
Alberta government.  Initiatives related to improving high school completion include 
Moving Forward with High School Redesign.  This initiative is focused on creating 
flexible, student-centred approaches to 21st century learning, including: increasing 
student engagement; improving student achievement; and, enhancing teacher practice.  
Schools and school administrators are provided with resources and  information on how 
completion rates are calculated in Alberta.  Further, successful projects underway across 
the province are shared and the different pathways students can take to complete high 
school are showcased.
The percentage of employed Grade 12 students who report they work more than 20 
hours per week has declined from 17 per cent to 13 per cent.  Research suggests that 
working more than 20 hours per week may interfere with realizing one’s educational 
potential.  Thus, the decrease in the number of Grade 12 students working more than 
20 hours per week may have contributed to an increase in students completing their 
studies.
Of the students who completed high school in five years, approximately 92 per cent 
completed high school in three years.  The three-year rate, 77. 9 per cent in 2015-16, 
is a reliable predictor of the five-year rate in subsequent years.  Projections indicate the 
five‑year rate is likely to increase over the next few years.  Also, some students who do 
not complete high school in the ECS-12 education system do so as young adults.  In 
2016, 93 per cent of Albertans aged 25–34 reported they had completed high school.  
80.6
81.5
82.0
82.1
83.2
82.7
0
20
40
60
80
100
2011-12
2012-13
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16
Target
Percent
STRATEGIC PRIORITY 


PDF PAGE 111
MEASURING UP	
109
3
3
PERFORMANCE MEASURE 
Literacy
Percentage of students who achieve the acceptable standard on Language Arts diploma 
examinations 
Source: Ministry of Education
Note(s): Data for the current year of 2016-17 are not available until October 2017. Overall results for 
Language Arts are a weighted average of results for the four language arts subjects: English Language 
Arts 30-1, English Language Arts 30-2, French Language Arts 30-1 and Français 30-1. Participation in 
diploma examinations was impacted by the flooding in southern Alberta in June 2013 and by the fire 
in Fort McMurray in May to June 2016. Caution should be exercised when interpreting the results over 
time. All results have been adjusted to reflect the change from previous data source systems to the 
Provincial Approach to Student Information.
For additional sources and notes see page 140
Results Analysis
Data for the current year of 2016-17 are not available until October 2017.  The overall 
proportion of students achieving the acceptable standard on Language Arts diploma 
examinations has remained stable over time.  Government is currently undertaking a 
curriculum review and development aimed at ensuring Alberta’s curriculum (programs 
of study, assessment, and learning and teaching resources) remains  responsive and 
relevant for students.  This project reflects the province’s commitment to continually 
improve its work in providing a world-class, student-centred curriculum for students 
now and in the future.  
In 2016-17, government published The Guiding Framework for the Design and 
Development of Kindergarten to Grade 12 Provincial Curriculum (Programs of Study).  
It was released in October 2016 to provide direction for curriculum development in 
English and French.  The guiding framework provides a common design, student-
centred direction, and standards for the development of all future provincial curriculum 
in all subjects.
Government also developed literacy and numeracy progressions, which describe key 
literacy and numeracy milestones along a continuum of developmentally appropriate 
expectations and behaviours across all subjects from K–12.  The progressions are available 
in English and French.  Literacy and numeracy are being supported in all programs of 
study.  
87.6
87.4
88.6
87.6
87.8
88.2
0
20
40
60
80
100
2011-12
2012-13
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16
Target
Percent
STRATEGIC PRIORITY 


PDF PAGE 114
112	
GOVERNMENT OF ALBERTA 2016 –17 ANNUAL REPORT
3
1
PERFORMANCE INDICATOR 
International Literacy (15 years old)
Performance of Alberta students in the Programme for International Student Assessment 
(PISA) of Reading Literacy 
Source: Council of Ministers of Education, Canada
Note(s): For comparability, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) 
average is based on the results of the countries included in the PISA 2003 assessment.
For additional sources and notes see page 141
Discussion
PISA is an international student assessment study in science, mathematics and reading 
literacy, administered every three years by the OECD.  
The literacy indicator is the average score achieved by a random sample of Alberta 
students on a standardized scale of reading literacy.
In 2015, PISA results were based on approximately 2,500 15-year-old students from 
100 schools across Alberta.  
PISA selects 15-year-olds to be the primary target population, as this age group is near 
the end of compulsory education.  PISA is designed to measure the extent to which 
youth, at age 15, have acquired some of the knowledge and skills that are essential for 
full participation in modern societies including participation in the workforce, post-
secondary education and lifelong learning.
Previous studies based on PISA data have shown how skills at age 15 would affect 
students in their later life.  For example, youth with strong reading skills were much 
more likely to have finished high school, pursue post-secondary education and finish 
it.  In addition, results from the Youth in Transition Survey show that there is a strong 
association between reading proficiency and education attainment.
PISA also collects information about teaching practices.  This information is used to 
support excellent teaching and leadership.
In 2015, Alberta scored 533 in reading literacy.  Although this score is lower than the 
result in 2003, the difference between the 2015 result and the 2003 result (543) is not 
statistically significant.
543
535
533
525
533
528
527
524
523
527
494
492
497
498
493
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
2003
2006
2009
2012
2015
Mean Scores
 Alberta
 Canada
 OECD Average
STRATEGIC PRIORITY 


PDF PAGE 123
MEASURING UP	
121
4
3
PERFORMANCE INDICATOR 
Crime Severity Index
Alberta Violent and Non-violent Crime Severity Index
Source: Statistics Canada, Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics, Table 252-0052, Crime Severity Index 
and weighted clearance rates
Note(s): The Crime Severity Index includes all Criminal Code violations including traffic, as well as drug 
violations and all Federal Statutes.
For additional sources and notes see page 144
Discussion
The national Crime Severity Index (CSI) jumped five per cent from 2014 to 2015 largely 
due to an 18 per cent increase in Alberta.  Western provinces all reported CSIs in 2015 that 
were higher than the national average, with Saskatchewan continuing to record the 
highest CSI, at 135. 8.
A gain in the national non-violent CSI was partly the result of an increase in property 
crime, particularly in Alberta where the increase in property CSI was primarily due to 
more incidents of breaking and entering, theft of $5,000 or under, and motor vehicle 
theft.
While the national CSI rate rose last year, it was still 31 per cent lower than a decade ago.  
In Calgary, the Alberta city with the highest increase in the non-violent CSI, there 
is likely a correlation between the increase in property offences  and the economic 
downturn that left many people out of work.  However, the ongoing influx of highly 
addictive drugs into the city is also likely driving up the property CSI.  
Between 2014 and 2015, the violent CSI in Alberta increased 12 per cent driven mostly 
by homicide and robbery.  Canada’s violent CSI also rose in 2015, primarily as a result 
of increases in Alberta (+12 per cent), Newfoundland and Labrador (+15 per cent), 
Saskatchewan (+9 per cent), British Columbia (+7 per cent),  Manitoba (+6 per cent), 
and the Northwest Territories (+28 per cent).
95
89
85
86
96
85
85
85
87
104
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
Index
Violent Crime
Non-violent Crime
STRATEGIC PRIORITY 


PDF PAGE 141
MEASURING UP	
139
STRATEGIC PRIORITY THREE
High School Completion
	
Source: Ministry of Education 
	
Note(s): Alberta Education calculates the rate at which Alberta students complete 
high school within three, four, and five years of starting Grade 10. The provincial 
rate is calculated by dividing the number of high school completers by the number 
of students in the Grade 10 cohort, adjusted for attrition.  Credentialed completers 
are those who have received an Alberta High School Diploma, an Alberta High 
School Equivalency Diploma or a Certificate of High School Achievement for 
completing knowledge and employability courses.
	
Non-credentialed completers refers to those students who leave school without 
one of the above credentials but who have earned credits in high school courses 
that enable them to continue into post-secondary or apprenticeship programs 
within three, four, or five years of starting Grade 10.
	
The tracking of Grade 10 Alberta students excludes some students such as those 
identified as having a severe or moderate cognitive disability or a severe multiple 
disability.  
	
Current and historical results have been adjusted to reflect the change from 
previous data source systems to Provincial Approach to Student Information 
(PASI).
Post-secondary Transition
	
Source: Ministry of Education 
	
Note(s): The high school to post-secondary transition rate reports the percentages 
of Alberta students in public, separate, francophone, charter, and accredited 
private schools who made the transition to post-secondary education including 
apprenticeships within six years of entering Grade 10.
	
The High School to Post-Secondary Transition Rate is calculated by dividing 
the number of students who enter post-secondary programs by the number of 
students in the Grade 10 cohort, adjusted for attrition.
	
Students from the Grade 10 cohort are counted as in-province post-secondary 
attenders if they are registered in a post-secondary-level program at an Alberta 
post-secondary institution or if they are registered in an apprenticeship program 
in Alberta.
	
Students are considered to have entered the post-secondary system if they attend 
a credit program, part-time or full-time, in a publicly-funded Alberta post-
secondary institution.  Information on post-secondary enrolments incorporates 
post-secondary Classification of Instructional Programs coding to better identify 
students enrolled in programs not deemed to be post-secondary level (e. g.  
academic upgrading).  Students in these kinds of programs are not considered 
transitioners for the purpose of this measure.
	
A student is considered to have entered the post-secondary system if the 
student has registered in an apprenticeship program.  A student registered in the 
Registered Apprenticeship Program (RAP) is not considered to have entered the 


PDF PAGE 142
140	
GOVERNMENT OF ALBERTA 2016 –17 ANNUAL REPORT
post-secondary system as students in RAP are high school students.  The Alberta 
Student Number is used to match students from the Grade 10 cohort with the 
apprentices in the Apprenticeship, Trade and Occupation Management System, 
Alberta Advanced Education’s apprenticeship information system.  Students 
identified as attending both a post-secondary institution and having registered in 
an apprenticeship program are reported as attending a post-secondary institution.
	
Alberta Education does not specifically track Alberta students who participate 
in post-secondary programs outside of Alberta.  An estimate of the number 
of students who have left the province to pursue post-secondary education is 
therefore factored into the High School to Post-Secondary Transition Rate.
	
Current and historical results have been adjusted to reflect the change from 
previous data source systems to PASI.
Literacy
	
Source: Ministry of Education 
	
Note(s):  This measure reports the percentage of students who achieve the 
acceptable standard on language arts diploma examinations.  Students who 
achieve the acceptable standard have developed the foundational skills needed 
to become literate adults.  The language arts measure is an average of the results 
in the following four subjects, weighted by the total number of individuals that 
wrote each of the exams: English Language Arts 30-1; English Language Arts 30-
2; French Language Arts 30-1; and Français 30-1.
	
Results on diploma examinations show how well Alberta students in public, 
separate, francophone, charter and accredited private schools are meeting 
provincial expectations as outlined in the Programs of Study.  Examination 
items are developed and standards are established by committees of teachers.  
The examination design is vetted through committees of stakeholders and by a 
standard-setting committee of teachers.
	
A test equating initiative has been phased in for the diploma examination program 
so that over time examinations are consistent and the results are comparable.  
	
Diploma examination results are reported in relation to the acceptable standard 
and the standard of excellence.  Students achieving the acceptable standard 
demonstrate that they have met the basic requirements of the course.  A mark of 
50 per cent on the examination represents the acceptable standard in a diploma 
examination course.  A mark of 80 per cent on the examination represents the 
standard of excellence and indicates the student has demonstrated performance 
significantly beyond the minimum requirements of the course.
	
Data for the current year (2016-17) are not available until October 2017.
Post-secondary Education
	
Source: Statistics Canada, Labour Force Survey 
	
Note(s): The measure is calculated by dividing the number of Albertans age 18-
34 who reported participation in a university, college, or other post-secondary 
institution by the total number of individuals in that age range.  Data on the 
population and number of participants is received from Statistics Canada and 


PDF PAGE 143
MEASURING UP	
141
compiled from the results of the Labour Force Survey.  The Labour Force Survey 
is a monthly, Canada-wide survey of a representative sample of households in the 
provinces and territories.  Data is collected on all members of the household who 
are 15 years of age or older.  Persons living on reserves, inmates of institutions and 
full-time members of the Canadian Armed Forces are excluded from the survey.  
The calculation of this measure uses an eight-month average (January to April 
and September to December) to account for the fact that many post-secondary 
students attend school during the fall and winter semesters while working during 
the summer.
Sponsored Research Revenue 
	
Source: Comprehensive Academic Research Institutions, collected by Economic 
Development and Trade
	
Note(s): This output measure reflects research capability in Alberta through 
the success of comprehensive academic and research institutions (universities) 
in attracting sponsored research funding from several sources.  The results give 
an indication of the research capability, capacity and competitiveness of these 
institutions.
	
Sponsored research revenues are those received outside of the university base 
operating grant and include both research grants and research contracts.  The data 
describes funding from provincial and federal governments, industry and non-
profit organizations, and includes capital investments.
International Literacy (15 years old) 
	
Source: Council of Ministers of Education, Canada
	
Note(s): The Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) seeks to 
measure the extent to which youth, at age 15, have acquired some of the knowledge 
and skills that are essential for full participation in modern societies.  Member 
countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 
along with partner countries and economies, developed PISA to improve their 
understanding of what makes young people – and education systems as a 
whole – successful.  The project reports on reading, mathematical and scientific 
literacy every three years.  Reading literacy is defined as an individual’s capacity 
to understand, use, reflect on and engage with written texts, in order to achieve 
one’s goals, to develop one’s knowledge and potential, and participate in society.
	
One method to summarize student performance and to compare the relative 
standing of countries or provinces is by examining their average test scores.  
However, ranking countries and provinces simply based on their average scores 
can be misleading because there is a margin of error always associated with each 
score.  Instead, ranges of scores, called confidence intervals, that take such a margin 
of error into account, must be used in order to identify whether statistically 
significant differences in average scores exist when comparing countries and 
provinces or comparing achievement over time.


PDF PAGE 146
144	
GOVERNMENT OF ALBERTA 2016 –17 ANNUAL REPORT
Awareness of Elder Abuse
	
Source: Ministry of Seniors and Housing Elder Abuse Training Session Surveys
	
Note(s): The data for this indicator is updated by the coordinator after every 
Taking Action Against Elder Abuse training session.  Participants are given a pre- 
and post-session survey to determine their level of knowledge and skills with 
respect to elder abuse before and after training.  Questions are related to ability 
to identify elder abuse, and knowledge of topics including: protective laws and 
tools, myths and biases of aging, broad context of elder abuse, ability to respond, 
how to make referrals, vulnerability and contributing factors for victims and 
perpetrators, skills and understanding to reconnect, resources and community 
response models, and self-care.  The number of individuals who have increased 
knowledge is demonstrated as a percentage of the total number of respondents.  
This is reported based on all training sessions performed in a given fiscal year 
(April 1 to March 31).
Crime Severity Index
	
Source:  Statistics Canada, Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics, Table 252-
0052, Crime Severity Index and weighted clearance rates
	
Note(s): The crime rate and the Crime Severity Index (CSI) are complementary 
measures of police-reported crime.  The crime rate measures the volume of crime 
reported to the police per 100,000 population, while the CSI measures both the 
volume and severity of crimes reported to the police.
	
To calculate the CSI, the weighted offences are summed and then divided by the 
population.  As with the other indexes, to simplify comparison, the CSI is then 
standardized to a base year of “100” (for the CSI, the base year is 2006).  In other 
words, all CSI values are relative to the Canada-level CSI for 2006.  CSI values are 
available back to 1998.
	
The crime severity index is calculated using Incident-based Uniform Crime 
Reporting Survey (UCR2) data.  For the period from 1998 to 2015 incident-
based UCR2 data are not available for all respondents.  In order to report this 
level of detail for police services still reporting to the Aggregate Uniform Crime 
Reporting Survey (UCR) over this time, a process of imputation was applied 
to derive counts for violations that do not exist on their own in the aggregate 
survey.  For approximately 80 percent of the aggregate offence codes, there is a 1:1 
mapping with a new incident-based violation code.  For violations where this was 
not the case, such as the aggregate other Criminal Code category, it was necessary 
to estimate (impute) this figure using the distribution of other Criminal Code 
offences from existing Incident-based UCR2 respondents.
Women’s Labour Force Participation Rate
	
Source(s): Statistics Canada, Table 282-0138 1, Labour Force Survey estimates 
(LFS), by population centres and rural areas based on 2011 Census boundaries, 
sex and age group and Statistics Canada, Table 282-0226 1, Labour Force Survey 
estimates (LFS), by Aboriginal (off-reserve) group, sex and age group, Canada, 
selected provinces and regions, http://www5. statcan. gc. ca/cansim/a47
	
Note(s): The Labour Force Survey provides information on the work activities of 
survey respondents during the week containing the 15th day of the month known 
