PDF PAGE 92
90	
GOVERNMENT OF ALBERTA 2017 –18 ANNUAL REPORT
Outcome Three
Working to Make Life Better by Protecting Health Care and Education
■
■Performance Measures (PM)
PM 1 – High School Completion
PM 2 – Post-secondary Transition
PM 3 – Literacy
PM 4 – Sponsored Research Revenue
PM 5 – Unplanned Readmissions of Mental Health Patients
PM 6 – Access to Primary Care through Primary Care Networks 
PM 7 – Access to Continuing Care Spaces
PM 8 – Influenza Immunization
PM 9 – Family Enhancement and Child Protection Services
PM 10 – Family Violence and Bullying Awareness
PM 11 – Indigenous Children in Care
PM 12 – Family Support for Children and Disabilities Program
■
■Performance Indicators (PI) 
PI 1 – International Literacy (15 years old)
PI 2 – Post-secondary Education
PI 3 – Health Expenditures
PI 4 – Life Expectancy at Birth
PI 5 – Awareness of Elder Abuse
PI 6 – Children Receiving Child Intervention Services 
PI 7 – Core Housing Needs
Measuring Up 2018 provides analysis for each of the 22 performance measures, and a 
discussion the results of each of the 17 performance indicators outlined in the 
2017-20 Strategic Plan.  The GoA Strategic Plan outlines the long-term goals or 
outcomes the government is committed to achieving and the initiatives or strategies 
undertaken to achieve them.  
Each outcome in the strategic plan identified key initiatives and activities to be 
undertaken by government ministries.  The performance measures and indicators 
in the GoA Strategic Plan are selected from ministry business plans on the basis of 
their relevance to the long term outcomes and the initiatives.  Also, as noted in the 
Management’s Responsibility for Reporting statement, government’s performance 
measures and indicators are selected based on their enduring nature to allow for 
comparability over time.  
Performance measures illustrate what progress is being achieved relative to the 
outcomes while indicators provide context and additional information to supplement 
the performance measures.  Performance results, indicator discussion, additional key 
initiatives and activities, and additional performance measures and indicators, are 
outlined in more detail in ministry 2017-18 annual reports.
Readers should note that performance measures and indicators reported in Measuring 
Up 2018 do not represent the current state of government policy.  For the most recent 
measures and indicators, readers should refer to the Government of Alberta 2018- 21 
Strategic Plan. With new and revised initiatives that have been implemented over 
the last 24 months, work is underway to develop new performance measures and 
indicators and solidify appropriate methodologies.  Conducting trend analysis and 
setting appropriate targets for performance measures and data collection can take up 
to three years.


PDF PAGE 116
114	
GOVERNMENT OF ALBERTA 2017 –18 ANNUAL REPORT
High School Completion
High school completion rate of students within five years of entering Grade 10
Source: Ministry of Education
Note(s): The most recent results are for 2016-17 as the data for this measure lag a year. Included in the 
calculation of high school completion rates is an estimated adjustment for attrition (i.e. students moving 
out of the province) using Statistics Canada estimates of out-migration.
For additional sources and notes see page 141
Results Analysis
The high school completion rate has improved over time and exceeded the target for 
2017-18.  Improving the high school completion rate continues to be a priority for the 
Alberta government.  Initiatives related to improving high school completion include: 
Moving Forward with High School Redesign, which is focused on engaged students, 
high levels of achievement, and quality teaching.  Schools that participate in high 
school redesign participate in more diploma examinations, perform better on diploma 
examinations and have higher completion rates than non-participating schools.  
Schools involved in high school redesign are provided with personalized support and 
opportunities to learn with and from other schools and authorities about student-
centred approaches to high school programming.
The percentage of employed Grade 12 students who report they work more than 20 
hours per week has declined from 20 per cent (2008-09 Grade 10 cohort) to 14 per 
cent (2012-13 Grade 10 cohort).  Research suggests that working more than 20 hours 
per week may interfere with realizing one’s educational potential.  Thus, the decrease in 
the number of Grade 12 students working more than 20 hours per week may have led 
to an increase in students completing their studies.
Of the students who complete high school in five years, most (about 91 per cent) 
complete in three years.  This makes the three-year rate a reliable predictor of the five-
year rate in subsequent years.  Projections indicate the five-year rate is likely to increase 
over the next few years.
In addition, some students who do not complete high school in the ECS–12 
education system do so as young adults in the adult learning system.  In 2017, 93 per 
cent of Albertans aged 25–34 reported they had completed high school.  This result has 
remained stable over time and is similar to the Canadian result.
81.5
82.0
82.1
83.2
83.4
83.0
0
20
40
60
80
100
2012-13
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16
2016-17
Target
Percent
Outcome 3	
Performance Measure 1


PDF PAGE 118
116	
GOVERNMENT OF ALBERTA 2017 –18 ANNUAL REPORT
Literacy
Percentage of students who achieve the acceptable standard on Language Arts diploma 
examinations
Source: Ministry of Education
Note(s): Data for the current year of 2017-18 are not available until October 2018. Overall results 
for Language Arts are a weighted average of results for the four language arts subjects: English 
Language Arts 30-1, English Language Arts 30-2, French Language Arts 30-1 and Français 30-1. 
Participation in diploma examinations was impacted by the flooding in southern Alberta in June 2013 
and by the fire in Fort McMurray in May to June 2016. Caution should be exercised when interpreting 
the results over time. 
For additional sources and notes see page 142
Results Analysis
Data for the current year of 2017-18 are not available until October 2018.  The overall 
proportion of students achieving the acceptable standard in Language Arts diploma 
examinations has increased over time.
Government is currently updating Alberta’s provincial Kindergarten to Grade 12 
curriculum, which ranges in age from eight to 30 years old.  To ensure student success, 
curriculum needs to be relevant, meaningful, and engaging for all students.  The 
province is working to ensure that provincial curriculum continues to give all students 
the best possible start in life.  
The province is completing the development of draft Kindergarten to Grade 12 
subject introductions, which describe the nature of each subject and explain why the 
subject is learned; draft Kindergarten to Grade 12 scope and sequences, which outline 
what students will learn and when they will learn it; and draft Kindergarten to Grade 
4 learning outcomes, which are what students are expected to know, understand, and 
be able to do in each subject and grade.
As schools change, school libraries have also evolved from simply providing 
information to students to engaging students and helping prepare them to become 
critical thinkers, evaluators, users, and creators of information and knowledge.  As 
such, learning commons promote global and cultural understanding as students 
collaborate with their local and broader community to investigate and create solutions 
to complex problems.  
87.4
88.6
87.6
87.8
87.8
88.4
0
20
40
60
80
100
2012-13
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16
2016-17
Target
Percent
Outcome 3	
Performance Measure 3


PDF PAGE 128
126	
GOVERNMENT OF ALBERTA 2017 –18 ANNUAL REPORT
International Literacy (15 years old)
Performance of Alberta students in the Programme for International Student 
Assessment (PISA) of Reading Literacy 
Source: Council of Ministers of Education, Canada
Note(s): For comparability, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) 
average is based on the results of the countries included in the PISA 2003 assessment.
For additional sources and notes see page 148
Discussion
PISA is an international student assessment study in science, mathematics and reading 
literacy, administered every three years by the OECD.  
The literacy indicator is the average score achieved by a random sample of Alberta 
students on a standardized scale of reading literacy.
In 2015, PISA results were based on approximately 2,500 15-year-old students from 
100 schools across Alberta.  
PISA selects 15-year-olds to be the primary target population, as this age group is near 
the end of compulsory education.  PISA is designed to measure the extent to which 
youth, at age 15, have acquired some of the knowledge and skills that are essential for 
full participation in modern societies including participation in the workforce, post-
secondary education and lifelong learning.
Previous studies based on PISA data have shown how skills at age 15 would affect 
students in their later life.  For example, youth with strong reading skills were much 
more likely to have finished high school, pursue post-secondary education and finish 
it.  In addition, results from the Youth in Transition Survey show that there is a strong 
association between reading proficiency and education attainment.
PISA also collects information about teaching practices.  This information is used to 
support excellent teaching and leadership.
In 2015, Alberta scored 533 in reading literacy.  The score is lower than the 2013 
results, but the difference is not statistically significant.  It is anticipated that Canadian 
data for PISA 2018 will be available in December 2019.
543
535
533
525
533
528
527
524
523
527
494
492
497
498
493
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
2003
2006
2009
2012
2015
Mean Scores
 Alberta
 Canada
 OECD Average
Outcome 3	
Performance Indicator 1


PDF PAGE 143
MEASURING UP	
141
in 2017.  Estimates are used for the remaining population and are derived by 
multiplying the per capita disposal rate with the unmeasured population.  There 
is recognition of methodology limitations and consideration for improvement.
Regulatory Compliance (Alberta Energy Regulator) 
	
Source: Alberta Energy Regulator (AER)
	
Note(s): AER field operations staff inspect the activities of the in-situ and 
conventional oil and gas, pipeline, and coal and oil sands mining industries.  
Inspections are selected based on a predetermined level of risk that the activity 
may pose to health and safety, the environment, resource conservation, and 
stakeholder confidence in the regulatory process.  Inspections result in an 
outcome of compliant or noncompliant.  The inspection findings and outcome 
are recorded into the Field Surveillance Inspection System database.  If the 
inspection is noncompliant the triage tool is used to assess the significance 
of the noncompliance and determine the need for an investigation.  If an 
investigation is warranted, information and evidence is collected relevant to the 
noncompliance.  The investigation will determine if an enforcement action is 
required.  
	
Field inspections for this measure include the following activities: drilling 
operations, gas facilities, oil facilities, pipelines, well servicing operations, 
drilling waste, well sites, coal mines, mineable oil sands and waste management 
facilities.  Inspections are counted based on the date of initial inspection.  
Outcome Three
High School Completion
	
Source: Ministry of Education
	
Note(s): Alberta Education calculates the rate at which Alberta students 
complete high school within three, four, and five years of starting Grade 10.  
The provincial rate is calculated by dividing the number of high school 
completers by the number of students in the Grade 10 cohort, adjusted for 
attrition.  Credentialed completers are those who have received an Alberta High 
School Diploma, an Alberta High School Equivalency Diploma or a Certificate 
of High School Achievement for completing Knowledge and Employability 
courses and the certificate requirements.
	
Non-credentialed completers refers to those students who leave school without 
one of the above credentials but who have earned credits in high school courses 
that enable them to continue into post-secondary or apprenticeship programs 
within three, four, or five years of starting Grade 10.
	
The tracking of Grade 10 Alberta students excludes some students, such as those 
identified as having a severe or moderate cognitive disability or a severe multiple 
disability.


PDF PAGE 144
142	
GOVERNMENT OF ALBERTA 2017 –18 ANNUAL REPORT
Post-secondary Transition
	
Source: Ministry of Education
	
Note(s): The high school to post-secondary transition rate reports the 
percentages of Alberta students in public, separate, Francophone, charter, and 
accredited private schools who made the transition to post-secondary education, 
including apprenticeships, within six years of entering Grade 10.  The High 
School to Post-secondary Transition Rate is calculated by dividing the number 
of students who enter post-secondary programs by the number of students in 
the Grade 10 cohort, adjusted for attrition.  Students from the Grade 10 cohort 
are counted as in-province post-secondary attenders if they are registered in a 
post-secondary-level program at an Alberta post-secondary institution or if they 
are registered in an apprenticeship program in Alberta.
	
Students are considered to have entered the post-secondary system if they attend 
a credit program, part-time or full-time, in a publicly-funded Alberta post-
secondary institution.  Information on post-secondary enrolments incorporates 
post-secondary Classification of Instructional Programs coding to better identify 
students enrolled in programs not deemed to be post-secondary level (e. g.  
academic upgrading).  Students in these kinds of programs are not considered 
transitioners for the purpose of this measure.  
	
A student is considered to have entered the post-secondary system if the 
student has registered in an apprenticeship program.  A student registered in the 
Registered Apprenticeship Program (RAP) is not considered to have entered the 
post-secondary system as students in RAP are high school students.  The Alberta 
Student Number is used to match students from the Grade 10 cohort with the 
apprentices in the Apprenticeship, Trade and Occupation Management System, 
Alberta Advanced Education’s apprenticeship information system.  Students 
identified as attending both a post-secondary institution and having registered 
in an apprenticeship program are reported as attending a post-secondary 
institution.  Alberta Education does not specifically track Alberta students who 
participate in post-secondary programs outside of Alberta.  An estimate of 
the number of students who have left the province to pursue post-secondary 
education is therefore factored into the High School to Post-Secondary 
Transition Rate.
Literacy
	
Source: Ministry of Education
	
Note(s): This measure reports the percentage of students who achieve the 
acceptable standard on language arts diploma examinations.  Students who 
achieve the acceptable standard have developed the foundational skills needed 
to become literate adults.  The language arts measure is an average of the results 
in the following four subjects, weighted by the total number of individuals that 
wrote each of the exams: English Language Arts 30-1; English Language Arts 
30-2; French Language Arts 30-1; and Français 30-1.
	
Results on diploma examinations show how well Alberta students in public, 
separate, Francophone, charter and accredited private schools are meeting 
provincial expectations as outlined in the programs of study.  Examination items 
are developed and standards are established by committees of teachers.


PDF PAGE 145
MEASURING UP	
143
	
The examination design is vetted through committees of stakeholders and by a 
standard-setting committee of teachers.
	
A test equating initiative has been phased in for the diploma examination 
program so that over time examinations are consistent and the results are 
comparable.
	
Diploma examination results are reported in relation to the acceptable standard 
and the standard of excellence.  Students achieving the acceptable standard 
demonstrate that they have met the basic requirements of the course.  A mark of 
50 per cent on the examination represents the acceptable standard in a diploma 
examination course.  A mark of 80 per cent on the examination represents the 
standard of excellence and indicates the student has demonstrated performance 
significantly beyond the minimum requirements of the course.
	
Data for the current year (2017-18) are not available until October 2018.
Sponsored Research Revenue 
	
Source: Comprehensive Academic Research Institutions, collected by 
Economic Development and Trade
	
Note(s): Sponsored research revenue data are collected directly from the 
Comprehensive Academic and Research Institutions (CARIs).  The CARIs 
submit the data using a template and guidelines which outline the information 
required and specific instructions regarding how the revenue should be 
reported.  The guidelines provided to the CARIs by Economic Development 
and Trade were developed to augment the guidelines in place for corresponding 
annual reporting submissions by the CARIs to the Canadian Association of 
University Business Officers (CAUBO) to report on Total Sponsored Research 
Revenue at Alberta universities.  CARIs are required to follow the CAUBO 
reporting guidelines for the appropriate year.  The CARIs derive the data from 
audited financial statements and supplementary schedules.  The reported 
data is compiled and analyzed by EDT in the Research Funding at Alberta’s 
Comprehensive Academic and Research Institutions report.
Unplanned Readmissions of Mental Health Patients
	
Source: Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI); Alberta Health 
Services, Provincial Inpatient Database (DAD)
	
Note(s): The unit of analysis is an inpatient encounter within a single acute 
inpatient facility.  Discharges to transfer between acute inpatient facilities are 
excluded although the discharge from the final facility after transfers would be 
included.  Readmission rates are attributed to the quarter in which a patient is 
originally discharged from an acute care hospital.  This requires that patients be 
tracked for 30 days after the end of the quarter to allow sufficient time from 
the date of initial discharge to determine whether a readmission will occur.  
Readmission rate reporting always lags by a quarter for this reason.
	
The Crude Readmission Rate equals the number of discharged patients 
readmitted to any acute hospital in Alberta as selected mental illness within 


PDF PAGE 150
148	
GOVERNMENT OF ALBERTA 2017 –18 ANNUAL REPORT
period, respondents who had not yet completed the survey were contacted 
by telephone and invited to participate.  The online survey was available for 
completion between October 26 and December 12, 2016.  The survey was 
hosted on the Advanis’ web server to maintain confidential responses.  Data 
collection for the telephone survey was conducted between November 21 and 
December 12, 2016.
	
The exact wording of the question used in the survey was as follows: How much 
do you agree that the services provided to you by the FSCD program have had a 
positive impact on your family? The possible answers for a respondent to select 
were Strongly Agree; Agree; Disagree; and Strongly Disagree.  The calculated 
result combined the two responses Strongly Agree and Agree.
International Literacy (15 years old) 
	
Source: Council of Ministers of Education, Canada
	
Note(s): The Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) seeks 
to measure the extent to which youth, at age 15, have acquired some of the 
knowledge and skills that are essential for full participation in modern societies.  
Member countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development, along with partner countries and economies, developed PISA 
to improve their understanding of what makes young people – and education 
systems as a whole – successful.  The project reports on reading, mathematical 
and scientific literacy every three years.  Reading literacy is defined as an 
individual’s capacity to understand, use, reflect on and engage with written 
texts, in order to achieve one’s goals, to develop one’s knowledge and potential, 
and participate in society.
	
One method to summarize student performance and to compare the relative 
standing of countries or provinces is by examining their average test scores.  
However, ranking countries and provinces simply based on their average scores 
can be misleading because there is a margin of error always associated with 
each score.  Instead, ranges of scores, called confidence intervals, that take such 
a margin of error into account, must be used in order to identify whether 
statistically significant differences in average scores exist when comparing 
countries and provinces or comparing achievement over time.
Post-secondary Education
	
Source: Statistics Canada, Labour Force Survey
	
Note(s): The data for this indicator is obtained from a custom tabulation 
performed by Statistics Canada based on the information collected by its 
Labour Force Survey (LFS).  LFS is a monthly household survey of a sample 
of individuals.  The target population is the non-institutionalized population 
15 years of age and over.  Recently, the monthly LFS sample size has been 
approximately 5,690 households for Alberta.  
	
The post-secondary education participants are identified by using the following 
questions from the LFS: “Last week, was … attending a school, college or 
university?”; “Was he/she enrolled as a full-time or part-time student?”; “What 
kind of school was this?”.  Responses that indicate attending a university, college 
