PHYSICAL PDF PAGE 128, 1-indexed
PERFORMANCE MEASURE                        3                                         STRATEGIC PRIORITY                   5
      pdf named: 16-17_MUP_p5-m3_atccs.pdf                                                                    2016-17 GoA Annual Report
                                                                                                        Measuring Up, Priority 5, Measure 3

                           Access to Continuing Care Spaces
                            Access to Continuing Care Spaces
                           Percentage of
                           Percentage of clients
                                         clients placed
                                                 placed inincontinuing
                                                             continuingcare within
                                                                         care      30 days
                                                                              within       of being
                                                                                      30 days       assessed
                                                                                               of being assessed
                                  100

                                      80                 69
                                             67
                                                                        60             60                            62
                                                                                                      56
                            Percent


                                      60

                                      40

                                      20

                                      0
                                           2012-13    2013-14        2014-15        2015-16        2016-17         Target

                           Source: Alberta Health Services, 7 Meditech rings for the South, Central and North Zones and from 2
                           Source: Alberta Health Services, 7 Meditech rings for the South, Central and North Zones and from 2
                           Strata health Pathways applications by the Calgary and Edmonton Zones
                           Strata Health Pathways applications by the Calgary and Edmonton Zones
                           For additional sources and notes see page 146


                           Results Analysis
                           Continuing Care Living Option refers to the level of care in a publicly-funded resident
                           accommodation that provides health and support services appropriate to meet the
                           client’s assessed unmet needs (i.e. Designated Supportive Living or Long-term Care).
                           The 2016-17 result of 56 per cent is six percentage points lower than the target of 62 per
                           cent. A number of factors have contributed to this result including the curtailment of the
                           planned investment in home care spending, as well as some unanticipated continuing
                           care capacity and facility issues that arose in 2016-17. For example, some continuing
                           care spaces did not open as originally planned this year; there were also some major
                           water incidents in continuing care facilities requiring restoration work that resulted in
                           displacement and repatriation of residents. These challenges have driven longer waits
                           and higher waitlists for placement into Continuing Care Living Options. All delayed
                           continuing care spaces are planned to open in the 2017-18 fiscal year.
                           To continue to address the broader capacity expansion need, the Government of Alberta
                           is committed to increasing capacity for publicly-funded facility-based continuing care
                           (which includes long-term care and designated supportive living). In Budget 2017,
                           $322 million was committed over four years to expand facility-based continuing care
                           spaces and the home and community care budget was boosted by $200 million. Capacity
                           issues are expected to be partly addressed when the planned spaces start to become
                           available across the next few years and as improvements to home and community care
                           are realized.




126                                                                          GOVERNMENT OF ALBERTA 2016 –17 ANNUAL REPORT


PHYSICAL PDF PAGE 148, 1-indexed
           March 31) by the total population covered by the Alberta Health Care Insurance
           Plan as at March 31 of the same fiscal year, and then multiplying the resulting
           quotient by 100 to obtain the percentage.
           The numerator is the total number of patients enrolled in PCNs in a given
           year (April 1 to March 31), as reported in Table 2.29 Primary Care Networks:
           Distribution by Health Region (AHS Zone), Number of Primary Care Physicians,
           Number of Patients, and Total Payments for the Service Year April 1, 2015 to March
           31, 2016, Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan Statistical Supplement. Patients are
           considered to be enrolled in a PCN when they are assigned to a physician/nurse
           practitioner/pediatrician registered to a PCN.
           The number of patients enrolled in a PCN is calculated by the payments issued
           to the program, which is associated with the providers within the PCN. The
           payments to the PCN are identified by the payments the providers receive
           through the Claims Assessment System (CLASS). CLASS is an application that
           collects and processes claims transactions for physicians of multiple disciplines
           and provides information of compensation for physician services.
           The denominator is the number of people with an Alberta Personal Health
           Number that are registered and covered under the Alberta Health Care Insurance
           Plan as at March 31 of a given year. This number is reported in Table 1.1 of the
           Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan Statistical Supplement.

      Access to Continuing Care Spaces
           Source: Alberta Health Services, 7 Meditech rings for the South, Central and
           North Zones and from 2 Strata Health Pathways applications by the Calgary and
           Edmonton Zones.
           Note(s): Percent of clients admitted to a continuing care living option (supportive
           or facility living) within 30 days of the Assessed and Approved date.
           Continuing Care Living Option refers to the level of care in a publicly funded
           resident accommodation that provides health and support services appropriate to
           meet the client’s assessed unmet needs (i.e. Designated Supportive Living Level 3
           or 4, or Long-term Care).
           Assessed and Approved date refers to the date the client is placed on the waitlist
           for a continuing care living option following the completion of the assessment
           and approval process.
           The result is calculated based on the number of individuals admitted to a
           Continuing Care Living Option within 30 days of their Assessed and Approved
           date divided by the total number of individuals admitted to a Continuing
           Care Living Option (supportive or facility living) during the reporting period,
           expressed as a percentage.

      Influenza Immunization
           Source: Ministry of Health; Alberta Health Services (AHS); Alberta Blue Cross;
           Health Canada




146                                             GOVERNMENT OF ALBERTA 2016 –17 ANNUAL REPORT
