            57




            [Ministry Name] | Annual Report 2019–2020   i

Classification: Public
Health, Government of Alberta | Health 2019 –2020 Annual Report

©2020 Government of Alberta | Published: August 2020
ISBN: 978-1-4601-4772-6
ISSN: 2367-9824

Note to Readers: Copies of the annual report are available on the Alberta Open Government Portal
website www.alberta.ca




ii                                                                     Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
Table of Contents
Preface ....................................................................................................................................................... 3

Minister’s Accountability Statement ............................................................................................. 4

Message from the Minister ................................................................................................................ 5

Message from the Associate Minister .......................................................................................... 7

Management’s Responsibility for Reporting ............................................................................. 8

Results Analysis .................................................................................................................................... 9
      Ministry Overview ........................................................................................................................................ 10
      Discussion and Analysis of Results ................................................................................................... 18
      Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology .................................................................... 58

Financial Information ........................................................................................................................ 73
      Reporting Entity and Method Consolidation .................................................................................. 74
      Ministry Financial Highlights .................................................................................................................. 75
      Supplemental Financial Information .................................................................................................. 81
      Financial Statements of Other Reporting Entities ...................................................................... 83
      Other Financial Information ..................................................................................................................159

Annual Report Extracts and Other Statutory Reports ..................................................... 167




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                                                                      1
Introduction




2              Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                          Introduction




Preface
The Public Accounts of Alberta are prepared in accordance with the Financial Administration Act
and the Fiscal Planning and Transparency Act. The Public Accounts consist of the annual report of
the Government of Alberta and the annual reports of each of the 21 ministries.

The annual report of the Government of Alberta contains ministers’ accountability statements, the
consolidated financial statements of the province and the Measuring Up report, which compares
actual performance results to desired results set out in the government’s strategic plan.

This annual report of the Ministry of Health contains the minister’s accountability statement,
the financial information of the ministry and a comparison of actual performance results to
desired results set out in the ministry business plan. This ministry annual report also
includes:

    ●    the financial statements of entities making up the ministry including
         Alberta Health Services and the Health Quality Council of Alberta, for which the
         minister is responsible;

    ●    other financial information as required by the Financial Administration Act and
         Fiscal Planning and Transparency Act, as separate reports, to the extent that the
         ministry has anything to report.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                    3
Introduction




Minister’s Accountability Statement
The ministry’s annual report for the year ended March 31, 2020, was prepared under my direction
in accordance with the Fiscal Planning and Transparency Act and the government’s accounting
policies. All of the government’s policy decisions as at June 26, 2020 with material economic or
fiscal implications of which I am aware have been considered in the preparation of this report.




[Original signed by]

Honourable Tyler Shandro
Minister of Health




4                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                Introduction




Message from the Minister
                                   It has been an honour to serve as Minister of Health this past year.
                                   Looking back, I feel very proud of the work that has been
                                   accomplished, not least of which was Alberta’s response to the
                                   COVID-19 pandemic.

                                   Resources were mobilized across the health system and across the
                                   province to respond to the pandemic. Alberta Health Services
                                   established a leading testing program and procured Personal
                                   Protective Equipment (PPE) early on in the pandemic and set aside
                                   acute care capacity to respond to a range of COVID-19 scenarios.

                               With the benefit of expert advice from Alberta’s Chief Medical Officer
                               of Health, public health measures were put in place that minimized
the spread of COVID-19, while balancing the economic impact. As a result, our province is
weathering the pandemic better than most, while remaining more open. This speaks to the strength
of our health system, the people that make it work and Albertans who did their part.

In addition to responding to COVID-19, this past fiscal year included a number of accomplishments
in line with our commitment to build a health system centered on patients, improving access to
services while maintaining sound fiscal stewardship.

I ordered the first comprehensive review of Alberta Health Services since its formation in 2009. The
review gathered input from staff, stakeholders and Albertans. The subsequent report includes 57
recommendations and 72 savings opportunities across all areas of Alberta Health Services
operations including clinical, non-clinical and back office. The savings will be reinvested to improve
access and patient care. Alberta Health Services is currently developing a plan to implement the
recommendations.

In December, we launched the Alberta Surgical Wait-times Initiative. Albertans can expect to see
wait-times reduced over the next four years to meet wait-time targets and ensure people receive
their care within clinically recommended times. As part of the initiative, chartered surgical facilities
will double their current volumes of procedures and complete 30 per cent of medically necessary
scheduled surgeries by 2023. In addition, we committed $100 million to upgrade existing surgical
facilities in hospitals across the province. Our partners at chartered surgical facilities and Alberta
Health Services are also committed to helping us perform additional surgeries that were delayed
due to COVID-19.

In line with our commitment to address unsustainable increases in health spending, we
implemented a new physician funding framework. The goal of the framework is to ensure physician
spending stays within the $5.4 billion physician compensation and development budget – which is
now a record high in Alberta. We continue listening to physicians to ensure fair compensation and
to respond to physicians’ concerns, and adjustments have been made to the physician funding
framework in response to feedback. We have also enhanced rural practice by: increasing funding to
the Rural, Remote and Northern Program; increasing training spots for medical education for
medical students who wish to pursue a career in rural Alberta; and increasing the on-call rate for
rural physicians. Red tape and barriers have been removed for physicians interested in pursuing
different compensation and models of practice including by simplifying the application process for
clinical Alternative Relationship Plan and streamlining the approval process for chartered surgical
facilities.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                          5
Introduction



Supporting health professionals to work to their full scopes of practice is another government
priority that was delivered this year. In September, we announced a $3 million investment to
support primary care networks to hire more nurse practitioners to work in community settings. We
also amended the Licensed Practical Nurses Profession Regulation to allow licensed practical nurses
to offer more services, including dispensing certain drugs.

Government began work on updating Alberta’s continuing care legislation to remove unnecessary
barriers and reduce red tape while ensuring high quality care and services. Given the challenges,
this sector has faced resulting from COVID-19 pandemic, this work will now be expanded to include
a broader review of facility-based continuing care. As well, we opened 611 new continuing care
spaces, including 68 long-term care spaces, 536 designated supportive living spaces (including 179
for dementia care), and seven palliative care spaces.

This past year marked the launch of phase one of Connect Care, which allows Alberta Health
Services to create a single electronic health record for each patient.

The other major focus this year, lead by Jason Luan, Associate Minister of Mental Health and
Addictions, was expanding access to mental health and addiction treatment services and supports
to enable a full continuum of care across the province.

Our health system demonstrated incredible resilience in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic. To the
many Albertans that work across our health system, whether it be working in the frontlines
providing direct care, or in the many labs or research facilities across the province: thank you for
your dedication and hard work in the face of an unprecedented world-wide pandemic. I look
forward to continued collaboration as we work together to make Alberta’s health system the very
best that it can be.




[Original signed by]

Honourable Tyler Shandro
Minister of Health




6                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                             Introduction




Message from the Associate Minister
                                   As Associate Minister of Mental Health and Addictions, I have had
                                   the privilege this past year of working with Minister Shandro and
                                   the dedicated staff at Alberta Health to improve access to recovery-
                                   oriented mental health and addiction supports.

                                With a $140 million investment, our government is working hard to
                                respond to a range of urgent needs for mental health and addiction
                                services in our communities and to bring attention and much-
                                needed resources to these important health issues. This investment
                                includes $4.3 million per year over three years to create an
                                additional 2,172 spaces for treatment at Fresh Start Recovery
                                Centre and Sunrise Healing Lodge, both in Calgary, and Thorpe
                                Recovery Centre near Lloydminster. We also announced $8 million
                                for additional psychosocial supports for people recovering from
opioid addiction, along with expanding the Virtual Opioid Dependency Program and the Opioid
Agonist Therapy Gap Coverage Program.

The COVID-19 pandemic has only increased the urgency of this work. In response, we created the
$53 million COVID-19 Mental Health and Addiction Action Plan, which is comprised of a
comprehensive suite of COVID-19-related mental health and addiction supports that will be
implemented in 2020-21.

In August of last year, we commissioned a review of the province’s supervised consumption
services and the socio-economic impact these sites are having on Albertans’ homes, businesses and
neighborhoods. Released this past March, the report is helping inform government’s next steps in
regards to supervised consumption services across the province.

In addition, last November, we appointed a 23-member Mental Health and Addictions Advisory
Council to develop strategic recommendations on a new recovery-oriented addiction and mental
health strategy.

Our government also took the important step of implementing legislation that mandates the
licensing of all residential addiction treatment providers in Alberta in accordance with the
Mental Health Services Protection Act. This will help ensure Albertans receive safe, quality addiction
and mental health care when seeking treatment at residential addiction treatment centres.

It has been a busy year, and while I am proud of all that we have accomplished, I recognize there is
much still to do. I look forward to continuing to work with health and community partners to
strengthen the entire continuum of mental health and addiction care to support Albertans on their
paths of recovery.




[Original signed by]

Honourable Jason Luan
Associate Minister of Mental Health and Addictions




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                          7
Introduction




Management’s Responsibility for Reporting
The Ministry of Health includes the Department of Health, Alberta Health Services, and Health
Quality Council of Alberta. The executives of the individual entities within the Ministry have the
primary responsibility and accountability for the respective entities. Collectively, the executives
ensure the Ministry complies with all relevant legislation, regulations and policies.
Ministry business plans, annual reports, performance results and the supporting management
information are integral to the government’s fiscal and strategic plan, annual report, quarterly
reports and other financial and performance reporting.
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the accompanying Ministry financial information
and performance results for the Ministry rests with the Minister of Health. Under the direction of
the Minister, I oversee the preparation of the Ministry’s annual report, including the financial
information and performance results. The financial information and the performance results, of
necessity, include amounts that are based on estimates and judgments. The financial information is
prepared using the government’s stated accounting policies, which are based on Canadian public
sector accounting standards. The performance measures are prepared in accordance with the
following criteria:
 Reliability – information used in applying performance measure methodologies agrees with
     the underlying source data for the current and prior years’ results.
 Understandability – the performance measure methodologies and results are presented
     clearly.
 Comparability – the methodologies for performance measure preparation are applied
     consistently for the current and prior years’ results.
 Completeness – outcomes, performance measures and related targets match those included in
     the Ministry’s Budget 2019.

As Deputy Minister, in addition to program responsibilities, I am responsible for the Ministry’s
financial administration and reporting functions. The Ministry maintains systems of financial
management and internal control which give consideration to costs, benefits, and risks that are
designed to:
 provide reasonable assurance that transactions are properly authorized, executed in
     accordance with prescribed legislation and regulations, and properly recorded so as to
     maintain accountability of public money;
 provide information to manage and report on performance;
 safeguard the assets and properties of the province under Ministry administration;
 provide Executive Council, the President of Treasury Board, Minister of Finance, and the
     Minister of Health the information needed to fulfill their responsibilities; and
 facilitate preparation of Ministry business plans and annual reports required under the Fiscal
     Planning and Transparency Act.

In fulfilling my responsibilities for the Ministry, I have relied, as necessary, on the executives of the
individual entities within the Ministry.


[Original signed by]

Lorna Rosen
Deputy Minister of Health
June 26, 2020




8                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                                                                        Results Analysis




Results Analysis
Table of Contents
    Ministry Overview ......................................................................................................................................... 10
          Organizational Structure .................................................................................................................... 10
          Operational Overview .......................................................................................................................... 10
          Key Highlights in the Past Year ........................................................................................................ 14
    Discussion and Analysis of Results......................................................................................................... 18
          Outcome One: An integrated health care system that puts individuals at the centre
          and leads to improved health outcomes for Albertans ......................................................... 20
          Outcome Two: A high-quality health system based on sound fiscal stewardship,
          clear accountabilities, efficient service delivery, and value for investment................. 30
          Outcome Three: Albertans have increased access to health care professionals
          and the mix of professionals that best meets their needs ................................................... 38
          Outcome Four: Albertans are supported by accessible and coordinated mental
          health and addiction services .......................................................................................................... 44
          Outcome Five: The well-being of Albertans is supported through population
          health initiatives.................................................................................................................................... 51
    Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology......................................................................... 58




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                                                                      9
Results Analysis




Ministry Overview
Organizational Structure
The Minister of Health is responsible for setting strategic policy, directing legislation and overseeing
the health system to ensure the health of Albertans is protected, resources are aligned with the goals
of the government, and public dollars are used appropriately. The ministry consists of:

        Department of Health;
        Alberta Health Services (AHS) – Alberta’s health authority responsible for delivery of the
         majority of health care services across the province; and
        Health Quality Council of Alberta (HQCA) – the legislated council responsible for
         monitoring health service quality and patient safety.




Operational Overview

Department of Health
The Department of Health implements the Government of Alberta’s strategic direction for health and
is responsible for the overall policy, legislation and monitoring of the health system’s performance.
Key functions include: advising government on health policy, legislation and standards; protecting
public health and promoting wellness; assuring quality; planning capital infrastructure; overseeing
the delivery of health care; supporting information management and technology; enabling health
care professionals; funding of the health system; and general oversight.

With direction from the Minister and Associate Minister, the Deputy Minister is responsible for the
daily operations of the Department of Health, which is structured as follows:

Deputy Minister's Office – provides leadership to the health system to ensure quality health
services, drive innovation, and continue to build and maintain collaborative relationships across
government ministries, AHS, and partner organizations. The office provides policy coordination and
issues management for the Minister and Associate Minister, as well as leadership in priority-setting,
decision-making, and operations of the ministry. The office is also responsible for ministry
correspondence services.




10                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                        Results Analysis



Financial and Corporate Services Division – forecasts and manages the ministry’s budget, funds
and monitors the financial activities of the department. It also provides financial advice and
prepares annual financial statements, ensuring compliance with Government of Alberta financial
legislation. The division oversees corporate planning and reporting; Alberta Health Services
accountability; governance of health sector public bodies; and access to information requests under
Alberta’s Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act and Health Information Act. The
division also oversees capital planning, including health facilities planning and coordinates
infrastructure projects with Ministry of Infrastructure and AHS. The division manages registration,
designation and bed survey processes and reporting. The division coordinates the grant approval
process and provides general administrative and contracting-based corporate services to enable the
department to fulfil its mandate. The division is responsible for the recovery of the cost of health
services from liable third parties where appropriate.

Health Information Systems Division – manages the administration of Alberta’s Health
Information Act, including health information policy and advice, as well as the strategic planning and
delivery of information management and technology systems. The division also provides provincial
governance of health information management; develops and implements legislative requirements,
policy and best practice information related to the secure exchange of health information; delivers
information technology solutions to support ministry operations and the provincial e-health
environment; and stewards the provincial programs of Alberta Netcare, the province’s electronic
health record, and MyHealth Records, the online personal health record for Albertans.

Health Service Delivery Division – is responsible for providing leadership and strategic direction,
including the development and implementation of policy, legislation and standards, as well as
ongoing monitoring for continuing care, addiction and mental health, and emergency health services.
The division is also responsible for working with government, service providers and community
partners to promote a coordinated, integrated community-based health care system for Albertans.
The division works closely with other social ministries, external organizations, partners, other
Canadian provinces and the federal government to plan health service delivery.

Health Standards, Quality and Performance Division – provides leadership for monitoring,
assessing, and improving health system performance; health care research and innovation; and
Indigenous health policy. The division is the primary source for Alberta’s overall health system data
standards and analytics, evaluating the health system’s performance to support evidence-based
policy decisions for all health sectors: primary health care, acute and emergency care, continuing
care, addiction and mental health, public health, and pharmaceuticals. It is the ministry’s core
strategic economic team developing and producing economic evaluations, predictive models,
financial forecasts and value for money analyses.

The division is also responsible for ensuring acute and ambulatory care service planning, including
transitions in models of care. Decisions are based on clinical evidence, integrate planning with other
health care sectors, and ensure health delivery and capital investment are aligned with government
policy direction. To improve existing acute and ambulatory care services, the division drives
improvements through clinical appropriateness initiatives in collaboration with health care delivery
partners, the Health Quality Council of Alberta and the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Alberta,
to ensure a safe and high-quality health system.

Health System Integration Division – leads strategic policy development, health system
integration and establishment of a vision for the health system of the future. The division leads and
coordinates the department’s health system legislation reviews and input to the government’s
decision-making and legislation processes. The division is also responsible for coordination of
department priorities such as the AHS Performance Review, intergovernmental relations, and
monitoring and reporting on the department’s red tape reduction initiatives.


Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                     11
Results Analysis



Health Workforce Planning and Accountability Division – develops and implements health
workforce policies, regulations, compensation strategies and governance models to enable a health
workforce that meets Albertans’ needs. The division collaborates with stakeholders, including
physicians, professional colleges and associations, and other internal and external partners, to
design and administer evidence-informed, value-oriented policies and health benefits that serve the
needs of all Albertans.

Pharmaceutical and Supplementary Benefits Division – provides governance to, and oversees
the administration of, the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan, remuneration systems and claims
processing for physicians and allied health professionals, and interprovincial reciprocal financial
arrangements. The division designs and delivers community-based supplementary health benefit
programs on behalf of Albertans requiring pharmaceutical, chiropractic, optical, dental, and other
medical supports (wheelchairs, prosthetics, oxygen, medical/surgical supplies, etc.). These
supplementary health benefit programs include premium-free prescribed drugs and other benefits
to seniors as well as pharmacist-administered vaccinations.

The division also provides leadership to national and provincial organizations to ensure accountable
and appropriate delivery of blood, organ and tissue donation, dialysis and other provincial clinical
services. Through leading engagement with cross-Canada working groups under the direction of the
Interprovincial Health Insurance Agreements Coordinating Committee, the division examines the
state of interprovincial health coverage to increase access and reduce barriers.

Public Health and Compliance Division – provides strategic direction and leadership through the
assessment, development and implementation of provincial policies, regulations, strategies, and
standards. This work is focused on emerging public health crises; communicable diseases;
immunization; compliance monitoring; environmental public health; health promotion; and,
emergency preparedness, response and recovery. The division carries out these functions to support
innovation and engagement with Albertans in wellness, health promotion, and injury and disease
prevention. To support health system quality, the division collaborates with partners to perform
compliance and monitoring activities and enforcement of the acts, regulations and standards
administered by the division in the areas of physician billing; continuing care accommodations;
residential addiction treatment facilities; health care services; infection prevention and control
oversight; and protection for persons in care.

Office of the Chief Medical Officer of Health – provides leadership and public health expertise on
all issues of public health importance such as health surveillance, population health, injury or
disease control initiatives and opioid emergency response. This includes taking necessary measures
to respond to health crises and to new and emerging pathogens, control and intervention programs
to limit the spread of communicable diseases, infection prevention and control measures, and health
risk assessments. The Chief Medical Officer of Health has overarching legislated responsibilities for
monitoring and reporting on the health of Albertans and intervening to protect and promote the
health of the public under authority of the Public Health Act. This is accomplished by supporting and
sometimes leading the development of healthy public policy and fulfilling the obligations of the Act.

Office of the Alberta Health Advocates – includes the Health Advocate and the Mental Health
Patient Advocate. The office supports Albertans in resolving their health-related concerns by helping
them navigate the health care system; referring individuals to the appropriate complaints resolution
services; providing information about the Alberta Health Charter; requesting the inspection of
provincial health care facilities; and, addressing patients’ issues and concerns in relation to the
Mental Health Act.

Communications (CPE-Health) – provides Albertans and health system partners with information
about ministry policies, programs, and initiatives. The CPE-Health team works with department staff


12                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                     Results Analysis



to develop and implement communications plans and offers communications support, such as media
relations, issues management, writing and editing services, product development, and online
communications services. The branch also works closely with AHS and other reporting entities to
coordinate ministry communications.

Corporate Counsel – through Alberta Justice and Solicitor General, Corporate Counsel leads a team
of lawyers that supports all aspects of the department activities ranging from contracting and
procurement, to developing and interpreting legislation and general legal advice to the ministry.

Human Resources – is dedicated to supporting initiatives, delivering programs, and providing
human resource expertise and services that attract, retain, and engage the department’s workforce.
The branch works in partnership with managers and employees to build and sustain workforce
capacity to achieve business goals and create an environment where employees are respected,
valued, engaged and resilient.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                  13
Results Analysis



Key Highlights in the Past Year
The ministry’s 2019-23 business plan, released as part of Budget 2019 on October 24, 2019, outlines
government’s vision for Alberta’s health system with five outcomes:

        An integrated health care system that puts individuals at the centre and leads to improved
         health outcomes for Albertans;
        A high-quality health system based on sound fiscal stewardship, clear accountabilities,
         efficient service delivery and value for investment;
        Albertans have increased access to health professionals and the mix of health professionals
         that best meets their needs;
        Albertans are supported by accessible and coordinated mental health and addiction services;
         and,
        The well-being of Albertans is supported through population health initiatives.

In 2019-20, the Ministry of Health led government’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic. In early
2020, the ministry’s priorities shifted to preparedness, prevention, response, and recovery to enable
Alberta’s health system to manage the unfolding public health emergency – to reduce the spread of
virus and ensure AHS was well prepared with staff and resources to respond to a range of scenarios.

This report provides an overview of important actions taken by the ministry in response to the
pandemic and describes the ministry’s progress on the government’s commitment to provide
sustainable, high-quality, patient-centred health care for all Albertans. Key highlights of the
ministry’s work to strengthen the health system, and close the gap in health outcomes and spending
between Alberta and comparable provinces include:

Completed an independent performance review of AHS
        Initiated a performance review of AHS as part of government’s commitment to the people of
         Alberta, in order to strengthen the health system and deliver better access and better results
         overall. This was the first comprehensive review of AHS since its formation in 2009.
        Released the AHS Performance Review report from contractor Ernst & Young LLP in
         February 2020. The report, available at https://open.alberta.ca/publications/alberta-health-
         services-performance-review-summary-report, included 57 recommendations and 72
         savings opportunities to improve the quality and long-term sustainability of health service
         delivery. Opportunities were identified in four areas:
             o     People – including management, physicians and the broader workforce and ensuring
                   the right mix of staff is used in AHS operations, with staff working to their full scope
                   of practice.
             o     Clinical Services – reducing clinical waste and variation and ensuring Albertans are
                   receiving the right care at the right time in the right place.
             o     Non-Clinical Services – ensuring the best value for money for support services
                   (e.g., housekeeping, food services, supply chain and back office).
             o     Governance – strengthening role clarity between the Department of Health and AHS.
        Directed AHS to develop a comprehensive implementation plan, to be delivered in August
         2020, to address the recommendations over the coming years. Implementing the proposed
         savings opportunities identified in the review will support AHS and the Ministry of Health in
         meeting budget targets. Savings will be reallocated to frontline services and government
         priorities like reducing surgical wait times.


14                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                        Results Analysis



Launched the Alberta Surgical Initiative
        Implementing the Alberta Surgical Initiative to improve and standardize the entire surgical
         system, with the goal of reduced wait times for medically necessary, publicly funded surgical
         procedures.
        Collaborating with partners to standardize clinical pathways for the patient’s journey to
         surgery and recovery, and centralize surgery intake, building on the intake models currently
         in place for cancer surgery and hip/knee replacements.
        Reviewing opportunities to expand capacity in chartered surgical facilities, which provided
         approximately 40,000 publicly funded surgeries in 2019.
        Committed $100 million to upgrade surgical suites in hospitals, which currently provide
         85 per cent of all publicly funded surgeries.
Physician Compensation Management
        The government implemented a new physician funding framework on March 31, 2020 in
         order to avoid projected cost overruns while maintaining the budget for physicians at
         $5.4 billion, ensuring physicians in Alberta are among the highest paid in Canada. The new
         physician funding framework is being carefully monitored for impacts to physicians and
         health care delivery, and necessary adjustments are made in consultation with the Alberta
         Medical Association. Of the framework’s 11 proposals, eight have been fully implemented,
         one rescinded (complex modifiers), and two delayed (overhead and clinical stipends to allow
         further review by AHS). As part of the new physician funding framework, a Physician
         Compensation Advisory Committee has been formed, with physician and public members, to
         examine all aspects of the physician services funding model and provide recommendations
         to the Minister supporting the delivery of high-quality, patient-focused health services.
        Streamlined the process for creating a clinical Alternative Relationship Plan (ARP), by
         simplifying the application process, to encourage more physicians to move to this
         compensation arrangement versus fee-for-service compensation. Alberta Health has been
         promoting ARPs to physicians because they incent more comprehensive, patient-centred
         care, while providing physicians with predictable funding and government with cost
         certainty.
        Completed an independent review of the Academic Medicine Health Services Program
         (AMHSP) to identify improvements to governance of the program and in preparation for a
         new AMHSP master agreement.
        Launched a plan to bring radiologist compensation more in line with other provinces.
Ensured health professionals are able to work to their full scope of practice
        Implemented the Primary Care Network (PCN) Nurse Practitioner Support Program to
         increase the presence of nurse practitioners (NPs) in primary and community care. As of
         September 2019, there were 50 NPs working in PCNs and a commitment of $3 million will
         support PCNs in hiring and funding more NPs.
        Amended the Licensed Practical Nurses Profession Regulation to allow LPNs to offer more
         services including administering blood or blood products and dispensing certain drugs.
        Began work to increase the number of midwifery courses of care available each year and
         enable midwives to work to their full capacity.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                     15
Results Analysis



Implemented drug cost saving measures, thereby freeing up funds for re-investment
        Implemented the Alberta Biosimilars Initiative whereby adult patients on a
         government-sponsored drug plan (except pregnant women) must switch to the lower cost
         biosimilar version of select higher-cost biologic medications by January 15, 2021 unless
         there is a clinical reason not to.
        Expanded the Maximum Allowable Cost pricing policy to three additional drug categories
         where government pays for the lowest cost drug in the category, saving approximately
         $15 million annually, to encourage cost-effective prescribing without compromising patient
         care.
        Changed the eligibility criteria for the seniors drug program, with expected savings of
         approximately $36 million annually. Effective March 1, 2020, only Albertans aged 65 years or
         older are eligible to receive coverage, and seniors’ family members under the age of 65 are
         no longer covered under the plan.
Invested in more long-term care and supportive living spaces, more home care services and
more palliative and end-of-life care options
        Began a review of the legislative framework for Alberta’s continuing care system that
         considers people-centred care, authority and responsibility for ensuring standards of care
         are met, and alignment of programs and services within and across continuing care. Public
         engagement was put on hold due to pandemic response priorities.
        Developed a plan to add and create new spaces and upgrade existing continuing care
         infrastructure, including both long-term care and designated supportive living spaces;
         implementation was put on hold due to pandemic response priorities.
        Opened 611 net new continuing care spaces, comprised of 68 long-term care, 536 designated
         supportive living (including 179 for dementia care), and seven palliative care spaces.
        Continued expansion of home care to enable more Albertans to remain in their homes and
         communities for as long as possible, and help ensure timely transition of inpatients out of
         hospital to an appropriate community setting.
        Committed $3 million over four years to support caregivers across Alberta, including those
         caring for continuing care clients and residents.
        Continued collaboration with community organizations to expand supports for those living
         with dementia and their caregivers.
        Committed $20 million over four years to support enhancement of palliative and end-of-life
         care across the province.
Expanded access to recovery-oriented mental health and addictions services and support
        Committed to improving the mental health and well-being of Albertans through the
         appointment of an Associate Minister of Mental Health and Addictions.
        Appointed a Mental Health and Addictions Advisory Council whose work and
         recommendations will form the basis of a new comprehensive provincial mental health and
         addiction strategy and coordinated action plan. The new strategy will identify key actions to
         improve access to recovery-oriented mental health and addiction services and will include a
         response plan specific to the COVID-19 pandemic.
        Budget 2019 committed $140 million over four years to expand access to a continuum of
         recovery-oriented mental health and addiction services including awareness, prevention,
         harm reduction and treatment. This includes $71 million for publicly funded residential
         addiction treatment and mental health spaces and $28 million to expand medically assisted
         detoxification spaces to support 4,000 more Albertans to receive treatment.


16                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                          Results Analysis



        Increased psychosocial supports for people recovering from opioid addiction via opioid
         dependency programs including addiction counsellors and therapists and peer support
         programs, such as recovery colleges.
        Mandated all residential addiction treatment providers in Alberta to be licensed in
         accordance with the Mental Health Services Protection Act, ensuring the provision of safe,
         quality addiction and mental health care.
        Commissioned a review of supervised consumption services (SCS) to evaluate the social and
         economic impacts of current and proposed SCS sites. In addition to other evidence and
         information, results of the review will inform the development of a comprehensive, long-
         term approach to protect communities and improve recovery-oriented supports for
         Albertans dealing with addiction. The ministry also extended funding for existing SCS, while
         determining the best way to move forward on a city-by-city basis and improve consistency
         across all sites.
        Expanded programs to support Albertans in crisis, including police and crisis teams,
         provincial family violence treatment programs, diversion programs, and by developing
         mental health court models. Supporting Albertans in crisis will ensure that more people have
         access to early intervention to reduce the mental health impact of trauma and support their
         recovery journeys.
        Initiated a review of Alberta’s Mental Health Act in response to a decision of the Alberta
         Court of Queen’s Bench, to more effectively protect the rights of patients, improve the care
         provided to them, and modernize the Act. The review also sought to respond to some long-
         standing concerns of key partners regarding the Act.
Collaborated with Indigenous communities to improve access to health care
        Continued work in partnership with Indigenous communities to improve access to
         high-quality, culturally appropriate health services and programs that support improved
         health outcomes, including improved access to primary care, support for maternal, infant
         and child health, expanded access to a continuum of mental health and addiction services,
         and funding to support Indigenous communities in assessing their continuing care needs.
Invested in health infrastructure and health information management systems and
technology
        Launched the first phase of Connect Care, which is a transformational large-scale IT project,
         allowing AHS to create a single electronic health record for each patient of AHS for services
         received in AHS, and ensuring all AHS health providers have access to and contribute to the
         same information. This project is supported by $400 million in capital funding over five
         years.
        Commissioned an independent third-party review of three of the ministry’s key IT platforms:
         Connect Care, Alberta Netcare and MyHealth Records to identify potential duplication of
         services and ensure maximum effectiveness, efficiency, and value for investment. The review
         is complete and the final report is available at https://open.alberta.ca/publications/review-
         of-connect-care-alberta-netcare-and-myhealth-records-final-report.
        Began the next phase of the Enabling New Models of Care (ENMOC) initiative to focus on the
         replacement and redesign of obsolete legacy IT systems to modernize administration of
         Albertans’ health care coverage and health care cards, which ultimately supports key pieces
         of legislation including the Alberta Health Care Insurance Act. The ENMOC implementation
         project is expected to start in the first quarter of 2020-21.
        Committed $3.55 billion in capital funding over the next four years for health facilities and
         equipment, the Capital Maintenance and Renewal program, and province-wide health IT
         systems.


Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                         17
Results Analysis




Discussion and Analysis of Results
The World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic on March 11, 2020. In response to
the public health crisis, contingency funding was added to Health’s 2019-20 budget and an
additional $500 million was added to the 2020-21 budget to ensure Alberta’s public health officials
had the resources they needed to deal with the pandemic. The government declared a public health
emergency on March 17, 2020, following the detection of the virus in Alberta, and based on advice of
Alberta’s Chief Medical Officer of Health.

A series of aggressive public health measures followed to limit the spread of the virus, including
mandatory 14-day quarantine for anyone entering Alberta from outside of the country; cancelling all
large gatherings; closing schools and daycares; restricting visitors to hospitals, long-term care and
other continuing care facilities; and restricting access to certain businesses.

In May 2020, with public health guidelines in place, Alberta began re-opening parts of the economy,
striking a careful balance to support the province’s social and economic well-being while keeping the
most vulnerable Albertans safe from COVID-19. As a result, and thanks to the efforts and sacrifices of
all Albertans, we were able to keep 85 per cent of the economy functioning and we were able to start
lifting more restrictions sooner than other provinces.

Albertans were kept informed through a provincial COVID-19 information website
www.alberta.ca/coronavirus-info-for-albertans.aspx including live-streamed provincial updates.
The Alberta government also worked with the federal government, municipal governments, and
Indigenous governments to ensure all Albertans benefitted from coordinated pandemic planning
and response.

The pandemic response was focused on protecting all Albertans from transmission, particularly
those most vulnerable to poor health outcomes, and keeping the health system functioning.
Government actions to reduce the impact of the virus on those in long-term care and licensed
designated supportive living residences included limiting and restricting visitors to facilities,
providing additional personal protective equipment (PPE) for staff, enhanced operational standards
and requiring staff that work in multiple designated supportive living or long-term care facilities to
choose one facility as their primary workplace.

Health partners had begun collaborating early in 2020 to ensure proven processes and well-trained
teams were in place to respond to a pandemic. AHS’ supply chain team was well prepared, and
coordinated the procurement of additional ventilators and millions of pieces of PPE from across the
globe to add to their stockpile of masks, gloves, gowns and face shields. The PPE was distributed to
AHS and AHS-contracted facilities, and to non-AHS facilities including disability service providers,
social service and civil society groups, and First Nations health organizations. Alberta also provided
PPE to Ontario and Quebec, where early demand for PPE was highest and the supply chain was
constrained. In the early stages of the pandemic, to ensure Alberta’s health care system would have
sufficient equipment, staff and hospital beds to meet the demands of pandemic-related health care,
all non-urgent surgeries were postponed.

As part of helping Albertans manage their health during the pandemic, those not providing essential
services were encouraged to stay at home as much as possible to help limit the spread of the virus.
Government supported a variety of programs and services focused on helping Albertans maintain
their physical, mental and emotional health, including telephone, online and virtual health care
services and support. For example, Albertans were able to visit with their regular physician by
phone or online, and government approved the use of a software application to enable those without




18                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                        Results Analysis



a regular doctor to connect to a doctor for routine medical advice and services through their
computer, tablet or phone.

Laboratory technicians processing COVID-19 tests, other allied health professionals, and contact
tracers were also at the forefront of Alberta’s pandemic response. Although routine visits were
paused, chiropractors, dentists and physiotherapists were able to continue to offer emergency
services, as well as provide advice via phone and videoconference, as appropriate. Alberta also
limited the supply of prescriptions to 30 days to protect the drug supply, and at the same time
introduced a program to reduce the copayment for all Albertans covered by a government-
sponsored prescription drug program.

Alberta was also the only province to supply its residents with non-medical masks, distributing more
than 40 million masks in in June and July. The partnership with drive-thru restaurants provided
more than 700 locations where Albertans could receive the masks over the counter or while in their
car, at the same time saving Alberta taxpayers millions of dollars in distribution and packaging costs.

Key success factors in Alberta’s provincial pandemic response were the expansion of world-class
testing capacity in Alberta Precision Labs and aggressive contact tracing. This was achieved by
pausing routine lab tests and increasing the number of staff trained to trace the contacts of infected
individuals. An online self-assessment tool helped Albertans determine whether they needed to be
tested for COVID-19. Data collected from across the health system informed comprehensive
predictive modelling of the virus outbreak to help experts anticipate and prepare for the expected
demands on Alberta’s health system and guide government’s response and recovery efforts.

Review of Programs and Services – Red Tape Reduction

The Ministry of Health is committed to the ongoing review of programs and services to ensure that
the best possible outcomes are being achieved for Albertans. As part of this ongoing review, the
ministry is committed to reducing red tape to make life easier for hardworking Albertans and
businesses. This includes reducing regulatory burden and unnecessary processes to encourage
economic growth and job creation; and make Alberta one of the freest and fastest moving economies
in the world.

Removing needless red tape – such as duplicate processes and rules – saves time, money and
resources, while still ensuring the health and safety of Albertans. This includes streamlining
processes and reducing regulatory requirements and unnecessary processes, where appropriate,
within the health system.

The department completed an inventory of all regulatory requirements applicable to the ministry
and its agencies (excluding AHS) governed by the Alberta Public Agencies Governance Act. The
inventory included all the requirements in the Ministry of Health’s legislation, regulations, policies
and forms. The department has already reduced the overall requirements in acts and regulations by
3 per cent and will continue work to identify unnecessary requirements with the goal of reducing
regulatory requirements by one-third.

These red tape reductions were achieved through amendments to four acts and three regulations
administered by the Ministry of Health. Other changes provide potential cost-savings and revenue
generating opportunities for businesses. For example, revisions to the Food Regulation allow
operators of Bed and Breakfast businesses to serve meals at any time of the day, rather than just
breakfast, creating the potential for additional revenue for these small business owners.

In addition, AHS recognizes the importance of reducing red tape to improve processes for patients
and their families, as well as health sector businesses. Significant reductions in AHS requirements


Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                     19
Results Analysis



have been achieved through centralizing and standardizing policies and forms. Going forward, the
continued implementation of AHS’ clinical information system, Connect Care, will play a key role in
reducing duplication of information gathered from both health practitioners and patients in AHS.

Outcome One: An integrated health care system that puts individuals at the centre and
leads to improved health outcomes for Albertans

Outcome statement |
Albertans’ health and well-being is improved through an integrated and aligned health care system
that is person-centred and structured around individuals, families, caregivers and communities.
Albertans have appropriate access to health services throughout their lives, and are active partners
in managing their health. Services and transitions will be timely and coordinated across primary
care, public health, continuing care and acute care – including timely surgical procedures.

Key Objectives

1.1   Collaborate with health system stakeholders to improve timely access to surgical
      procedures and timely transition of all inpatients out of hospital to an appropriate
      community setting.

The Alberta Surgical Initiative (ASI) aims to reduce wait times for medically necessary, publicly
funded surgical procedures to within clinically recommended timelines. This will be achieved
through improvement and standardization of the entire surgical system – from the time patients
seek advice from their family doctor, through to when they are referred to a specialist, and to their
surgery and rehabilitation. Wait time information is available on the Alberta Wait Times Reporting
website at waittimes.alberta.ca.

AHS is working with partners to standardize clinical pathways, and create a centralized intake model
to manage wait list volume and demand across the province. There are currently central intake
models for cancer surgery and hip/knee replacements. In 2019, AHS continued an assessment of
current surgical intake processes to inform improvements and coordination. AHS is also working to
bring surgical specialties into the Alberta Netcare eReferral system in alignment with the ASI.

In Alberta’s surgical system, surgeries are performed in hospitals or independent clinics. The AHS
Performance Review final report identified opportunities for AHS to better utilize hospital operating
room time and resources, including consideration of alternative clinical pathways to enable a wider
range of less complex procedures in chartered surgical facilities (previously referred to as “non-
hospital surgical facilities”) rather than using hospital operating rooms. The report also
recommended creation of a dedicated independent provider’s secretariat to provide expert advice
on innovative approaches to procurement and funding models for health services delivered by
independent providers, such as chartered surgical facilities.

Alberta’s chartered surgical facilities offer safe, low-risk and cost-effective surgeries, must follow
safety and quality standards, and must be accredited by the College of Physicians and Surgeons of
Alberta. These facilities currently have capacity for 15 per cent of all publicly funded surgeries
provided in Alberta each year. Last year, chartered surgical facilities provided about 40,000 publicly
funded surgeries under contract with AHS at no cost to patients. Increasing the annual number of
surgical procedures provided in these facilities will free up capacity in hospitals for emergency
surgeries and more complex procedures.




20                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                        Results Analysis



At the end of January 2020, AHS started the process of gauging the interest and ability of chartered
surgical facilities to provide more publicly funded surgeries as part of the ASI. In March 2020, the
initiative was paused due to the pandemic. Despite the delay, AHS is expected to initiate a formal
Request for Proposals process in fall 2020 as part of the ambitious goal to provide more surgeries
with shorter wait times for Albertans.

In early March 2020, the government announced a capital investment of $100 million to upgrade
surgical suites, which currently provide 85 per cent of the province’s publicly funded surgeries.
Upgrades include large-scale renovations and some new operating rooms in Edmonton, Calgary,
Grande Prairie and Lethbridge. These capital investments and dedicated operational funding will
ensure existing operating rooms in the province’s hospitals are used more efficiently. These
upgrades will allow facilities across the province to perform additional cardiac, orthopedic, cancer,
urological, and gynecological procedures, reducing the waitlist for these types of surgeries by 2023.

The AHS Performance Review identified several initiatives that AHS had previously undertaken to
improve timely patient flow throughout the health care system. These initiatives, such as Enhanced
Recovery After Surgery, brings physicians and clinical care teams together to standardize care
before, during and after surgery to support quality care and patient outcomes, while also shortening
time spent in hospital.

In 2019, AHS also worked on transition guidelines to better coordinate care from family doctor to
the hospital and back home, and reported that as of the end of 2019, the Collaborative Care program
(CoACT) is now active on 234 units at 53 sites across the province, with 33 units having reached full
implementation. In the CoACT program care teams work together, in partnership with patients and
families, to achieve optimal health outcomes. CoACT frameworks have been developed for
Continuing Care, Addictions and Mental Health, and Women’s Health. A framework for Emergency
Departments is in development.

Coordination of care is also supported by electronically notifying a primary care doctor when their
patient is admitted or discharged from a hospital in Alberta, receives day surgery, or visits an
emergency department. The first clinics started receiving hospital eNotifications in August 2019.

1.2   Support Albertans in accessing appropriate and timely palliative and end-of-life care by
      increasing awareness of how and when to access palliative care options, shift from
      hospital to community-based home and hospice care, and expand effective caregiver
      supports.

Across Alberta, palliative and end-of-life care (PEOLC) is offered in a range of settings including, but
not limited to, acute care hospitals, outpatient clinics, primary care provider settings, community
hospice spaces, continuing care facilities (designated supportive living and long-term care),
emergency medical services, and home care. A variety of programs and services aim to improve the
quality of life for those nearing the end of life, including those living with a life-limiting illness.
Consideration of options for timely, appropriate, and quality care could include advanced care
planning discussions that enable reflection on personal values and preferences, establishing goals
for care that span the disease process from early diagnosis to end-of-life, and providing bereavement
support.

Alberta’s ongoing work in PEOLC aligns with Health Canada’s Action Plan on Palliative Care (2019),
as well as PEOLC related initiatives and priorities occurring in other Canadian jurisdictions. Budget
2019 committed $20 million over four years to support enhancement of PEOLC across the province.
PEOLC enhancement initiatives were paused due to pandemic response priorities.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                     21
Results Analysis



In addition to this investment, as part of Enhancing Care in the Community, AHS has implemented a
number of PEOLC-related initiatives to improve community-based care and reduce reliance on acute
care services. As of December 2019, these include expansion of home and palliative care services;
medical treatment for palliative home care clients by emergency medical services personnel, which
reduces hospitalizations; and, the Rural Palliative In-Home Funding Initiative, which increases
equitable access to palliative home care services in rural areas. Covenant Health, a faith-based
organization operating 17 hospitals and care centres across Alberta, works in partnership with AHS
in the delivery of PEOLC. Covenant Health’s Palliative Institute focuses on supporting excellence in
palliative care through clinical support, education, research, policy, and community engagement.

In addition to these actions, AHS has implemented a number of provincial initiatives that support the
overall delivery of PEOLC in any health care setting. These include developing and implementing a
provincial Advance Care Planning and Goals of Care Designation policy, as well as corresponding
resources and provincial 24/7 on-call palliative physician support for primary care providers caring
for pediatric and adult PEOLC patients.

AHS has also successfully established a provincial PEOLC website through MyHealth.Alberta.ca
myhealth.alberta.ca/palliative-care with information for patients, families/caregivers and health
care providers. This work included developing and implementing guidelines and resources to
support health care providers and volunteers in providing PEOLC and information about palliative
care provided in hospices in Alberta.

1.3   Enhance home care options and access to self-managed care to continue the shift
      towards home and community care in order to support Albertans with disabilities and
      chronic conditions (including people living with dementia) and their caregivers.

The ministry is committed to ensuring the province’s continuing care system provides Albertans
with the health, personal care and accommodation services they need to support their quality of life
and ability to age with autonomy and dignity in their own homes. Government committed $3 million
over four years to support caregivers across Alberta, including those caring for continuing care
clients and residents.

Federal and provincial funding allowed continued expansion of home care to enable more Albertans
to remain in their homes and communities for as long as possible and help ensure timely transition
of inpatients out of hospital to an appropriate community setting.

The AHS Performance Review identified opportunities for AHS to strengthen its integration with
primary care through expansion of community-based and home care programs. AHS’ Intensive
Home Care (IHC) program is an example of an enhanced program that is being implemented across
the province. IHC provides case management and coordination of services, including health services,
personal care and caregiver support for those clients recently discharged from hospital, to safely
enable them to remain at home until an appropriate designated living option becomes available.

The government remains committed to improving the lives of people living with dementia and their
caregivers and is supporting several initiatives to encourage innovation in both community and
facility-based settings. The province invested $881,000 in 2019-20 to address the occurrence of pain
and depressive moods in designated supportive living and long-term care settings. In addition,
24 grant-funded initiatives were launched which will support people living with dementia, and their
caregivers, to get connected at a local level (both community and facility based) in creative and
supportive ways.

Community-based projects included dementia-friendly programming at the Camrose Public Library
and dementia-friendly transportation by Drive Happiness. Facility-based projects included the


22                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                         Results Analysis



implementation of life stations and dementia wayfinding at Fairview and Sunderland Place Long-
term Care Centres and cognition carts at Lamont Health Care Centre. Going forward, the impact of
targeted grants will continue to be seen throughout Alberta, including increased supports for rural
and remote parts of the province through expansion of the Alzheimer Society of Alberta and
Northwest Territories’ First Link® program and the community Dementia Ambassador volunteer
program.

The government is committed to expanding access to self-directed funding options such as Self-
Managed Care (SMC), a program that provides funding directly to a client or their legal
representative to hire a care provider of their choice. SMC can improve the quality of life and
experience of home care clients by giving them more control over who comes into their home to
provide care, as well as the scheduling of their care. The SMC option is designed for individuals with
complex care needs who require more significant amounts of personal support (such as assistance
with bathing, eating etc.) and home support services (such as homemaking and meal preparation).
The ministry is currently examining options for improving availability and access to self-directed
funding for home and community care clients.

On February 7, 2020, the government announced a review of the legislative framework for Alberta’s
continuing care system to ensure Albertans have access to high-quality continuing care. The review
will consider topics such as people-centred care; clear authority and responsibility for ensuring
standards of care are met; and, improved alignment of programs and services within and across
continuing care. Public engagement was put on hold due to the pandemic response priorities. When
engagement resumes it will be vital to gather perspectives from Albertans including
clients/residents and their families, and key system partners – including home care providers,
facility operators, seniors’ organizations and others.

1.4   Evolve the use of information technology to improve person-centred care, including
      modernizing administration of the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan and Alberta’s
      personal health care cards.

Modern-day demands on Alberta’s publicly funded healthcare system require modern-day solutions,
including evolving the use of information technology (IT) within the health system. IT supports
integrated patient care, allows patients to be an active participant in their health and care, and gives
Albertans many ways to access information about their health concerns by phone, via online chat or
virtual visits, or through access to health information through the MyHealth Alberta website
myhealth.alberta.ca.

These connections enabled by IT remain critical during the pandemic, including the ability to access
the online COVID-19 assessment tool and the advice available through Health Link 811. Online
resources were made available through the Government of Alberta’s pandemic response website
alberta.ca/covid-19-information.aspx. These resources include information on how Albertans can
protect themselves and their families during the pandemic, as well as psychosocial and community
supports for caregivers and factsheets with COVID-19 information for students, for example.

Supports for Albertans’ mental and emotional health are important, even more so during the
pandemic. Albertans can address mental health issues as early as possible to avoid escalation and
the need for higher levels of service. Care and support can be accessed through a range of help lines,
such as the Mental Health Help Line at 1-877-303-2642, the Addiction Help Line at 1-866-332-2322,
and the Family Violence Information Line, available at 310-1818 for anonymous help in more than
170 languages.

The ministry is also developing protocols and processes for a 24-hour phone line staffed by a sexual
assault nurse examiner to provide real-time guidance and support to health professionals, who may


Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                      23
Results Analysis



be outside major urban centres, as they conduct sexual assault examinations, including evidence
collection. The Ministry of Health is also collaborating with the Ministry of Justice and Solicitor
General to gather data related to sexual assault evidence kit collection to identify opportunities for
improvements.

In 2019-20, work progressed on a number of key IT systems and initiatives including Connect Care,
Alberta Netcare, Community Information Integration, the Central Patient Attachment Registry,
MyHealth Alberta, MyHealth Records, and Enabling Models of Care (ENMOC). The ENMOC initiative
aims to redesign and replace nine core business applications supporting Alberta Health Care
Insurance Plan (AHCIP) registration, enrollment, provider payments, new models of care, and data
provisioning.

Connect Care (which launched in Edmonton in November 2019) provides a platform that allows AHS
to establish an organization-wide system for patient medical charts, workflow and decision-making,
and secure messaging between clinicians, ensuring all AHS health providers have access to and
contribute to the same pool of information. Having a shared system supports team-based, integrated
care with a focus on the patient, and efficient and effective service provision, which helps reduce
disjointed care, gaps, overlaps, errors and delays. Government has committed $400 million in capital
funding over five years to support this largest clinical IT transformation project in AHS’ history.

Alberta Netcare is the province’s electronic health record. This system holds a consolidated copy of
key patient-centred health information from multiple care delivery organizations, including
hospitals, diagnostic facilities, pharmacies and clinics. AHS is a major contributor of information,
which will become more standardized and robust with the implementation of AHS’ Connect Care
system. As of March 31, 2020 over 49,000 registered health care providers have access to the
system.

Alberta Netcare also hosts an eReferral system, which connects health care providers and specialists
to assist communication about non-urgent clinical questions and patient access to timely
appointments with specialists. The number of specialties and the number of health zones that are a
part of the eReferral program continues to grow. AHS reported that in 2019-20, two specialties were
added to eReferral, namely Family Medicine - Transgender Care, and Psychiatry - Child and
Adolescent.

In 2019-20, $4.6 million was invested in the Community Information Integration/Central Patient
Attachment Registry Project to support continuity of care across care settings. The Community
Information Integration program brings patient health information from community clinics into
Alberta Netcare for sharing between community-based physicians and other providers in the
patient’s circle of care. This information includes selected clinical data on physician office visits, and
specialist consultation reports. It also connects to the Central Patient Attachment Registry, which
links a patient to their family physician so that the physician can automatically receive notifications
from AHS regarding patient admissions and discharges. These programs improve continuity of care,
encourage better disease management and care planning, and enable smoother transitions between
care settings, all while increasing efficiency in the system by avoiding duplicating care.

The MyHealth Alberta website provides Albertans with trusted health information, services, and
tools that empower them to manage and participate in their health care journey. As of
December 31, 2019, the number of visits to the site had increased by 78 per cent (over 22.4 million
visits) compared to the same period last year (12.6 million visits).

MyHealth Records (myhealth.alberta.ca/myhealthrecords) is a secure online platform available to all
Albertans 14 years of age or older, through a computer or mobile device. The platform can assist
Albertans in taking an active role in managing their health, such as recording and tracking blood


24                                                                           Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                        Results Analysis



pressure and fitness activities, and viewing their results from commonly ordered lab tests,
immunization records, and medication records. As at March 31, 2020, MyHealth Records had over
140,000 registered users.

The adoption of new technology through the ENMOC initiative is key to improving administration of
health care coverage including modernization of Alberta’s personal health care cards. Health is
collaborating with Service Alberta to determine the most effective method for modernizing personal
health care cards to ensure the cards are safe, secure and durable. Health is also working with a
third-party vendor on one-time revalidation and subsequent ongoing renewal processes for health
care cards, ensuring only eligible Alberta residents receive services covered by the AHCIP.

Other IT system improvements in 2019-20 included an automated report submission process for
PCNs; enhancement of Alberta’s organ and tissue donation registry; enhancements to the Alberta
Provincial Surveillance system; and, new reporting functionality for immunization and adverse
events following immunization, as per the new requirements outlined in Alberta’s Immunization
Regulation.

The ministry paused some key IT change initiatives including progress on rolling out the
Connect Care initiative, to concentrate IT efforts on supporting the COVID-19 response.

1.5   Engage with Indigenous communities and the federal government to improve access for
      Indigenous People to high-quality health services that support improved health
      outcomes.

The Alberta government is responsible for publicly funded health care and services for all Albertans,
including First Nations, Métis, and Inuit peoples. In addition to this, the federal government provides
specific programs and services for on-reserve First Nations Albertans. Despite investments in
Indigenous health programs, Indigenous people experience disproportionately poorer health
outcomes, for reasons including lower physician attachment rates, less access to primary care
services, and experiences of racism in the health system.

The ministry is committed to working with Indigenous communities to improve access for
Indigenous people to high-quality health services that support improved health outcomes. A series
of Health Sub-Tables have been established under protocol agreements with the
Treaty 8 First Nations of Alberta, the Blackfoot Confederacy, the Métis Nation of Alberta, and the
Long-Term Government and Funding Arrangement with the Metis Settlements General Council.
Formal working relationships have been established through the Regional Indigenous Organization
process. Both types of working arrangements provide a means of engaging communities on matters
that impact Indigenous peoples, and to identify activities with tangible outcomes to address
Indigenous health inequities. The federal government is also engaged in supporting and
coordinating the implementation of Jordan’s Principle in Alberta to ensure that First Nations
children are not denied access to health and social services due to jurisdictional disputes or their
First Nations status.

In 2019-20, disparities in primary care continued to be addressed through the Clinical Alternative
Relationship Plan (ARP) program. The Indigenous Wellness Program ARP and Siksika Health and
Wellness ARP, with an annual funding envelope of $8.2 million, funds primary care physicians for
services in Indigenous clinics across the province, including the Indigenous Wellness Clinic in
Edmonton, and services in Fort Chipewyan First Nation, Bigstone Cree Nation, Enoch Cree Nation,
Maskwacis Cree First Nations, and Siksika Nation. The Indigenous Wellness Program ARP also
improves availability of pediatric, obstetric and psychiatric care.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                     25
Results Analysis



Other initiatives described under Outcomes 2 and 4 include expanded access to a continuum of
mental health and addiction services to provide a range of appropriate support for individuals,
families and communities, as well as funding to support Indigenous communities in assessing their
continuing care needs.

Performance Metrics

Performance Indicator 1.a
     Unplanned medical readmissions to hospital within 30 days of discharge

                                      Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                                               2019-20
       2015-16                   2016-17                    2017-18                   2018-19                   Actual

        14.6%                    13.8%                       13.7%                     14.0%                    13.5%
 Source: Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI). Alberta Health Discharge Abstract Database (DAD); Hospital Morbidity
 Database (HMDB); National Ambulatory Care Reporting System (NACRS).

The indicator tracks the percentage of medical patients with unplanned readmission to hospital
within 30 days of leaving the hospital. Results exclude hospital admissions for surgery, pregnancy,
childbirth, mental health diseases and disorders, palliative care and cancer therapy.

Results Analysis

The percentage of unplanned readmissions of patients recently hospitalized because of a medical
condition has remained relatively stable over the past five years. The 2019-20 result of 13.5 per cent
is 1.1 percentage point lower than in 2015-16. A lower percentage means fewer patients have been
readmitted to hospital within one month of discharge.

Although readmission may involve external factors, lower readmission rates are supported by
discharge planning and continuity of services after discharge. Rates may also be impacted due to the
nature of the population served by a hospital facility, such as elderly patients or patients with
complex health needs, or by the accessibility of post-discharge health care services in the
community.

The Canadian Institute for Health Information ranked Alberta seven out of 12 provinces/territories
for this indicator in 2018-19. AHS continues to monitor hospital readmissions and a range of
initiatives have been undertaken to address the needs specific to each zone. For example, patients
with multiple chronic conditions can now be linked to Community Health Navigators to assist them
with system navigation, understanding information, locating community resources, and supporting
self-management. Coordination of care is also improving because of recent enhancements to the
health information system that enables electronic notification of primary care doctors when their
patient is admitted or discharged from hospital.




26                                                                                            Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                           Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 1.b
     Median number of days hospital stay extended until home care services or supports
     were ready

                                     Prior Years’ Results                                                 2019-20
                                                                                                           Actual
        2015-16                    2016-17               2017-18                 2018-19

           25                       16                       12                     8                        8
                                                                                                       (preliminary)
 Source: Alberta Health Discharge Abstract Database (DAD).

This indicator tracks timely access to home care by counting the median number of days an Albertan
remains in an acute care hospital when they no longer require it and they are waiting for home care
services or supports to be available to them for discharge. The median number of days is the mid-
point between the minimum and maximum number of days a person’s hospital stay was extended
for this reason. A patient with instructions to return to their doctor or referral to a specialist (as part
of a routine discharge plan) is not counted in this metric.

Results Analysis

The preliminary 2019-20 median result of eight days is consistent with the 2018-19 result. The
desired result is to lower the number of days a person is waiting for discharge from hospital until
home care services and support are ready. A number of factors can explain an extended stay,
including availability of services, and complexity of post-discharge needs that require more time to
plan appropriate services at home. Other factors that can influence the indicator results include
accessibility to comprehensive home care services, such as through AHS’ Intensive Home Care
program, or client-driven delays due to availability of a friend or family caregiver at home.

Performance Indicator 1.c
     Ambulatory Care Sensitive Condition hospitalization rate

                                      Prior Years’ Results                                                2019-20
                                                                                                           Actual
         2015-16                   2016-17              2017-18                  2018-19

          373                       360                   351                      3411                     321
 Source: Numerator: Alberta Health Discharge Abstract Database (DAD); Denominator: Alberta Health Population Estimate.
 1
  The 2018-19 result is updated.

This indicator measures the number of people (under 75 years of age) per 100,000 population who
were hospitalized for health conditions known as ambulatory care sensitive conditions, which
include: grand mal status and other epileptic convulsions; chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases;
asthma; heart failure and pulmonary edema; hypertension; angina; and, diabetes.

Results Analysis

In 2019-20, 321 people (under 75 years of age) per 100,000 population were hospitalized for health
conditions that are routinely treated outside of a hospital inpatient setting by a range of health
professionals. This year’s result is a significant improvement on 2018-19 results.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                         27
Results Analysis



While not all hospital admissions for ambulatory care sensitive conditions are avoidable, it is
assumed that appropriate ambulatory care could help prevent the onset of this type of illness or
condition, control an acute episodic illness or condition, or manage a chronic disease or condition.
Optimizing management of these health conditions in the community, including primary health care
settings, and support for people in managing their health conditions can contribute to both
improved patient outcomes and reduced health care costs.

The ministry continues to focus on increasing access to care in the community and developing a
coordinated approach across the continuum of care, to help people prevent and manage chronic
health conditions and diseases and improve their quality of life. The ministry is working
collaboratively with community partners to coordinate the planning and delivery of supports and
services across the province in all AHS health zones. In addition, Alberta’s Strategic Clinical
Networks focus on specific areas of health such as cardiovascular health and stroke; diabetes,
obesity and nutrition; and, respiratory health to implement clinical best practices and ensure
consistent care across the province.

Performance Indicator 1.d
     Wait times for surgical procedures

            Surgery                             Prior Years’ Results                        2019-20
      (national benchmark)         2015-16    2016-17        2017-18       2018-19           Actual

      Hip replacement
                                    80.5%       80.2%         70.5%          68.5%            65.5%
     (benchmark 182 days)
      Knee replacement
                                    77.7%       75.2%         64.6%          65.0%            61.5%
     (benchmark 182 days)
      Cataract surgery
                                    60.6%       56.8%         53.3%          48.2%            45.1%
     (benchmark 112 days)
 Source: Alberta Health Services

This indicator tracks the percentage of selected common surgical procedures undertaken within
established national benchmarks. The results are based on the time (in days) within which people
had their surgical procedures performed in Alberta as planned. The wait time calculations do not
include persons who received emergency surgical care.

Results Analysis

The 2019-20 results for all three types of surgical procedure included in this indicator show a
decline, meaning that fewer Albertans are receiving the surgical procedure within national
benchmark wait times when compared to 2018-19 results. Shorter wait times are expected in the
future as the Alberta Surgical Initiative is implemented over the next three years. Alberta’s Surgery
Strategic Clinical Network is also implementing initiatives to improve access and decrease wait
times, reduce variation in clinical practice, and increase quality of surgical care provincially.

The following table provides results published by the Canadian Institute for Health Information. For
the reporting time period (April 1-September 30, 2018), more Albertans receive surgical procedures
within national benchmark wait times than those waiting for surgeries in a number of other
provinces. However, a higher proportion of people in comparator provinces of Ontario and Quebec




28                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                                Results Analysis



receive the surgeries within benchmark wait times than in Alberta and a higher proportion of people
in British Columbia than in Alberta receive cataract surgery within the benchmark wait time.

         Percentage of Surgical Procedures undertaken within national benchmark wait times 1
                                   (April 1 – September 30, 2018)2
                          AB3      BC3      SK        MB        ON3     QC3      NB      NS       PEI      NL       Canada

 Hip replacement           70        67       66       49       84       80      55       49       49       88          75

 Knee replacement          66        59       56       37       79       77      43       47       26       75          69

 Cataract surgery          49        64       62       29       70       83      67       68       40       77          70
 Source: Canadian Institute for Health Information.Waittimes.cihi.ca
 1
  National Benchmark wait times: Hip Replacement (182 days); Knee Replacement (182 days); Cataract Surgery (112 days)
 2
 The most recent data available for provincial comparison. Provinces: Alberta, British Columbia, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario,
 Quebec, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island, and Newfoundland and Labrador.
 3
  Comparator provinces: Alberta, British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec.


Performance Measure 1.e
     Percentage of scheduled surgeries performed in chartered surgical facilities (formerly
     known as non-hospital surgical facilities)

                             Prior Years’ Results                                         2019-20                2019-20
       2015-16             2016-17               2017-18               2018-19             Target                 Actual

     Not Available1    Not Available1        Not Available1             15%                17%                    15%
 Source: Alberta Health Services Discharge Abstract Database (DAD); National Ambulatory Care Reporting System (NACRS).
 1
  Results not available as this is a new performance measure.

This indicator tracks the percentage of all surgeries in Alberta that were performed in chartered
surgical facilities (CSFs). Currently, 43 CSFs provide surgeries under contract with AHS. Most are in
Edmonton and Calgary. All facilities must be accredited by the College of Physicians and Surgeons of
Alberta and follow safety and quality standards.

Results Analysis

In the past year, accredited CSFs in Alberta provided 15 per cent of all publicly funded surgeries,
with 85 per cent of surgeries provided in hospitals. The result for 2019-20 is consistent with
2018-19 and is two per cent lower than the 2019-20 target. The desired result is to increase the
percentage of scheduled publicly funded surgeries performed in CSFs. The 2019-20 result was
inhibited by the pause in scheduled surgical procedures in March due to the pandemic. Up to
mid-March, AHS was on target to meet the 2019-20 CSF performance target.

Alberta has set aggressive targets to move surgeries deemed safe and appropriate to CSFs over the
course of the Alberta Surgical Initiative. Targets have been set that will see incremental increases up
to the 2022-23 target of 30 per cent of scheduled surgeries performed in CSFs. This will result in
expanded surgical capacity in the provincial health care system and reduction in wait times for less
complex scheduled surgeries.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                              29
Results Analysis



Outcome Two: A high-quality health system based on sound fiscal stewardship, clear
accountabilities, efficient service delivery, and value for investment

Outcome statement |
Alberta’s health system is based on high-quality, reliable and cost-effective services where all
stakeholders are accountable and contribute to positive health outcomes. Responsible fiscal
management, supported by evidence and innovation, will ensure the long-term sustainability of
Alberta’s health system.

Key Objectives

2.1   Develop and implement strategies that support the fiscal sustainability of the health
      system, bringing Alberta’s health spending down to national norms by 2022-23. This
      includes a performance review of Alberta Health Services, to identify efficiencies and
      savings in administration and other areas that could be directed towards front-line
      services.

Alberta has the largest integrated provincial health care system in Canada, which provides quality
care and allows for opportunities to develop new ways to improve patient care and health outcomes.
Despite its strengths, Alberta’s health system, like all health systems, faces challenges. The biggest
challenge is delivering high-quality, patient-centred care while ensuring sustainability. Alberta
spends significantly more per capita on health care than comparable provinces. However, Albertans
have not seen the health outcomes they should expect from this level of investment. In fact, some
results are worse than elsewhere in Canada.

Alberta is facing rising demand on its health care system. Alberta’s health care spending has been
increasing and so have wait times. The province’s population continues to grow, and like in other
jurisdictions, there has been a sustained increase in the number of seniors and individuals with
complex and chronic medical conditions. The province is now also facing unprecedented financial
and economic challenges due to the COVID-19 pandemic and low oil prices. This means that it is
more important than ever for the ministry to find ways to transform the health system, making it
more efficient and effective.

An independent panel (MacKinnon Panel on Alberta’s Finances) commissioned by the government
noted that Alberta continues to spend more on health care on a per capita basis than the comparator
provinces of Ontario, British Columbia and Quebec. The panel’s report, released in September 2019,
recommended using other provinces as models, and engaging nurses, doctors, other health
professionals, stakeholders and the public where appropriate, to make improvements to Alberta’s
health system. The report is available at https://open.alberta.ca/publications/report-and-
recommendations-blue-ribbon-panel-on-alberta-s-finances.

Recommendations included making better use of Alberta’s health system resources, such as
providing more health care in community settings rather than in hospitals; adjusting the mix of
Alberta’s health professionals; and limiting the increasing cost of physician services by providing
incentives for physicians to move to alternative compensation plans. Progress is being made in these
areas and performance metric results are included in this annual report.

The 2019 Capital Plan committed $3.55 billion in capital funding over four years for health facilities,
equipment and IT infrastructure. This funding allows investment of almost $2.9 billion to deliver
quality health care through building and upgrading health care facility infrastructure across the
province. The plan included continuation of several previously approved health capital projects and
programs, including the Calgary Cancer Centre; the Grande Prairie Regional Hospital; expansion of


30                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                        Results Analysis



continuing care capacity across the province; and capital investment in province-wide IT systems.
The plan deferred the proposed Child and Adolescent Mental Health building in Edmonton and
delayed opening of the new south Edmonton hospital to 2030, which is consistent with the expected
growth in demand for acute care beds in the region. In 2019-20, a number of health facilities were
completed and/or opened including a new Detoxification and Residential Treatment Facility for the
Protection of Children Abusing Drugs (PChAD) program in Red Deer; comprehensive building
envelope repairs to the Northern Lights Regional Health Centre in Fort McMurray; and seven
Affordable Supportive Living Initiative (ASLI) projects representing 438 affordable supportive living
and long-term care spaces.

In 2019-20, $30 million of the capital budget was spent on the annual Medical Equipment
Replacement and Upgrade Program. The 2019 Capital Plan also committed $533 million over four
years to Health’s Infrastructure Maintenance and Renewal Program. This funding represents
government’s ongoing commitment to maintaining and preserving existing health facilities with the
intent of reducing overall deferred maintenance.

In 2019, the government commissioned Ernst & Young LLP to examine the operations and
organizational efficiency of Alberta Health Services. The review included significant engagement
with Albertans, including patients, staff and physicians working in AHS, as well as key stakeholder
groups such as patient advocates, regulatory bodies and associations, municipalities and
universities. Changes stemming from the review will increase health system efficiency, while
improving quality and delivering better results for Albertans. The review provided clear evidence
and opportunities where the health system can do better in terms of costs and results. The AHS
Review Report identified that AHS is well-positioned to achieve a greater level of system
performance. Enhancing standardization and reducing variation in care will improve patient flow
through the health system and patients will be cared for in the right place at the right time. The
report is available at https://open.alberta.ca/publications/alberta-health-services-performance-
review-summary-report.

The government accepted the report’s recommendations, with two exceptions: there will be no
hospital closures and no consolidation of urban trauma centres. AHS will develop an implementation
plan by August 2020 with a detailed analysis that will include timing and sequencing of changes to
the system, a clear line of sight between expected savings and reallocation to priority areas, and
metrics that provide evidence that access and quality of care are being maintained or improved.

2.2   Ensure investments in information technology are effective, efficient, and improve the
      secure exchange of information among health professionals and with patients, while
      reducing potential duplication and overlap.

Sharing health information is foundational to team-based and community-based care, and involving
Albertans as participating members of their health care teams. Recognizing that different health care
professionals may have unique information sharing needs or constraints, the government has
responded by evolving and adapting to a changing system with increasing demands. This requires
innovation to work differently, while maintaining quality and safety, and addressing barriers to
information sharing across IT platforms. Not addressing these barriers can impact a health care
providers’ ability to make informed decisions when providing care, impede data collection, limit
online access to health information for Albertans and affect broad system policy development.

The ministry has three key IT platforms for sharing health information – Connect Care,
Alberta Netcare and MyHealth Alberta. In 2019-20, the province spent $137 million on AHS’
Connect Care clinical information system. This major initiative aims to significantly reduce the
number of systems AHS uses, stabilize failing IT infrastructure and provide provincial laboratory
information services. Efficient service delivery is expected through Connect Care, which will offer a


Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                      31
Results Analysis



central access point to patient information for services provided by AHS and its affiliated partners,
common clinical standards and enable the use of best health care practices. Health care providers
practicing outside of AHS will have access to more robust, consistent and complete clinical
information from AHS through enhancements to Alberta Netcare, which is the provincial electronic
health record system. MyHealth Records enables Albertans to access some of their personal health
information online through a secure portal.

In fall 2019, the ministry commissioned an independent third-party to review Connect Care,
Alberta Netcare and MyHealth Records. Ernst and Young LLP were engaged to conduct the review to
identify potential duplication of services and ensure maximum effectiveness, efficiency, and value for
investment in these three platforms. The ministry received the final report in March 2020. The final
report is available at https://open.alberta.ca/publications/review-of-connect-care-alberta-netcare-
and-myhealth-records-final-report.

2.3   Improve the measuring, monitoring and reporting of health system performance to
      drive health care improvements.

Evidence-informed decisions are the basis of high-quality care in Alberta’s health care system. The
ministry continues to increase capacity for evidence-informed practice and policy through enhanced
data sharing, research, innovation, health technology assessment, and knowledge translation.

On March 5, 2020, the government announced plans to develop an enhanced data-sharing
environment to store valuable provincial health and non-health data in a secure environment that
will safeguard and protect personal information. This world-class health data warehouse will
strengthen health analytics and drive research and innovation for health-system improvement.

The department is leveraging its existing data warehouse and up to 35 years of health data to enable
other ministries to access data to ensure cross-ministry policies, programs and services support the
health and well-being of all Albertans. The academic sector, as well as organizations such as AHS, the
Alberta Medical Association and the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Alberta, will also have
secure access to the data, providing significant opportunities to use data to make meaningful
improvements in care and outcomes for patients. For example, Strategic Clinical Networks (SCNs)
have brought together clinicians, researchers, patients and policy-makers to improve the quality and
standardization of care in specific areas of health, such as cancer care, seniors care and
cardiovascular health.

The ministry has established a $10 million Health Innovation Implementation and Spread Fund to
support implementation of proven innovations in the health system, such as new health
technologies, services or ways of providing care. The fund has enabled AHS to implement five
projects aimed at different aspects of health care, including timely cancer diagnosis; improved access
to gastroenterology specialist advice; training for parents to support earlier discharge of their baby
from hospital; and extra training for primary care providers – in pediatric mental health, and care
for patients infected with Hepatitis C. More projects are expected to be selected in 2020-21.

Grants totaling $2.2 million annually have been committed to fund internationally recognized
external partners at the University of Calgary, University of Alberta, and the Institute of Health
Economics, to conduct rigorous, independent health evidence reviews. The findings of these reviews
enable the ministry and community health providers to implement policies and best practices in the
Alberta context to achieve better health outcomes at a reduced cost.

Ongoing collaboration with ministry partners, including the Health Quality Council of Alberta and
AHS, aims to improve how the province measures and reports on patient and client experiences,
which helps ensure patient needs are at the centre of health care improvements.


32                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                       Results Analysis



2.4   Create new continuing care spaces where they are most needed, in an efficient and cost-
      effective manner.

Alberta is facing an increasing demand for facility-based continuing care spaces, due to an aging
population combined with the rising prevalence of chronic conditions. It is likely that more and
more Albertans will need the increasing levels of support offered through home care and in long-
term care and designated supportive living facilities to maintain their independence and quality of
life.

The government has initiated the implementation of a new approach to adding, developing,
refurbishing and replacing continuing care spaces, which builds on the best aspects of the former
Affordable Supportive Living Initiative (ASLI) program. The new approach uses ASLI’s approach to
partnerships to ensure new continuing care units are added and developed more quickly and cost-
effectively. The ministries of Health, and Seniors and Housing are also working together to include
continuing care spaces where needed in lodge developments for a flexible range of care. Funding
through this partnership has been committed for projects in Spirit River, Manning, Camrose,
Drumheller, and Oyen. Federal funding provided by a Canada-Alberta bilateral agreement under the
National Housing Strategy has also been committed to support the planning for new affordable
seniors housing for three of these projects in Oyen, Spirit River and Manning.

The government worked with AHS to identify communities with priority need for new continuing
care spaces to ensure that spaces are developed where they are most needed. In 2019-20, 37
Indigenous communities/organizations received funding to support collaboration with AHS to
conduct needs assessments and to support business case development for continuing care capacity
in their communities. Additionally, construction is underway to expand and redevelop the
Gene Zwozdesky Centre at Norwood in Edmonton. With an investment of $379 million, the Centre
will provide specialized rehabilitative programs, long-term care and dementia care to help seniors
and those with complex care needs maintain the best quality of life.

AHS reported that by the end of 2019, nine new continuing care facilities had been opened – four in
the Calgary Zone, four in the Edmonton Zone and one in the North Zone. As of March 31, 2020, AHS
had opened 611 net new continuing care spaces, made up of 68 long-term care, 536 designated
supportive living (including 179 for dementia care), and seven palliative care spaces.

2.5   As a member of the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance, collaborate with other
      provinces to achieve cost-effective and affordable coverage of prescription drugs.

Government spending on prescription drugs is one of the fastest growing costs in the health system,
with Alberta spending considerably more on a per capita basis than most provinces. Alberta
participates in the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance with other provinces to reduce
prescription drug costs and increase access to clinically effective and cost-effective drug treatment
options.

Alberta is implementing a number of changes to publicly funded prescription drug programs that
better align with other provinces. For example, family members under the age of 65 are no longer
eligible under the coverage for seniors drug program, and more cost-effective biosimilars are
covered instead of their (more expensive) originator brands. Meanwhile, Alberta is targeting funding
to those Albertans most in need - for example through the initiation of the Opioid Agonist Therapy
Gap Coverage Program and by reducing out-of-pocket costs for patients on the Palliative Coverage
Program.

The ministry relies on health technology assessments by the Canadian Agency for Drugs and
Technologies in Health, the advice provided by the Alberta Expert Committee in Drug Evaluation and


Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                    33
Results Analysis



Therapeutics, and AHS’ drug review processes to inform program decisions. These subject matter
experts provided critical evidence-based advice to inform government’s decision to move to
clinically proven lower cost alternatives, while ensuring publicly funded drug programs deliver the
best possible health outcomes in the most cost-effective manner.

Effective December 12, 2019, the Alberta government, under the Alberta Biosimilars Initiative,
changed the funding of select biologic drugs for patients on Alberta government-sponsored drug
plans. Affected adult patients (except pregnant women) were advised they must switch to the
biosimilar version of higher cost biologic medications by July 1, 2020. An exception can be requested
by a physician if there is a medical reason that prevents a patient from switching to a biosimilar
drug. The requirement to switch is now postponed until January 15, 2021, due to increased demands
on health providers and the uncertainty facing Albertans as a result of the pandemic.

Another strategy to keep prescription drug costs low is the Maximum Allowable Cost (MAC) policy,
which was expanded in November 2019, to include three additional drug categories. MAC is the
maximum amount Alberta’s government-sponsored drug plans will pay for a specific drug product
within a grouping of therapeutically equivalent drug products. Expanding this policy encourages
cost-effective prescribing without compromising patient care. Government estimates savings of
approximately $15 million annually from changes to the MAC policy.

Changes to eligibility criteria for the seniors’ drug program were introduced this past year, with
expected savings of approximately $36 million annually. Effective March 1, 2020, only Albertans
aged 65 years or older are eligible to receive coverage under the seniors’ drug program, and seniors’
spouses, partners and dependants under the age of 65 are no longer covered under the plan. Seniors’
family members under the age of 65 who require ongoing health benefits coverage were advised to
consider other coverage options, including private insurance or public options, such as the
government-sponsored Non-Group Coverage program.

Performance Metrics

Performance Indicator 2.a
     Provincial per capita spending on health care

                                                       Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                                                  2019-20
           Category
                                      2015-16        2016-17             2017-18             2018-19             Forecast1
                                                                                            Forecast1
       Total - Nominal                 $4,836         $4,977              $5,113              $5,254               $5,118
       Hospitals                       $1,954         $1,982              $1,987              $2,007               $1,956
       Physicians                      $1,108         $1,146              $1,184              $1,201               $1,170
       Drugs                            $359           $370                $365                 $366                $356
 Source: Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI), National Health Expenditure Trends (NHEX), 1975 to 2019. Statistics
 Canada, Demography Division (population estimates).
 1
     There is a two-year lag in actual results.

This indicator is used to monitor the trend of financial resources used for health care for each
person covered by Alberta’s publicly funded health care system. The total provincial government
per capita spending on health care includes spending by the Ministry of Health, including AHS and
health-related spending by other government departments and agencies, and is a gauge of the
overall success of cost containment initiatives.


34                                                                                            Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                               Results Analysis



Results Analysis

Government and health system partners, such as health professional colleges and associations, the
pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance and AHS, work together to manage the three biggest health
care costs— hospital services, physician compensation, and pharmaceuticals.

The 2019-20 forecast results show per capita provincial government health care spending was
reduced for all categories in comparison to 2018-19 forecast results. The desired result is for the
per capita provincial government health care spending figure to decrease over time to close the gap
between Alberta and the comparator provinces of British Columbia (BC), Ontario (ON) and
Quebec (QC). The results provided in the following table of provincial health care spending show
Alberta’s total per capita health spending is more than these comparator provinces. Alberta also
spends more than these three provinces on hospitals and physicians and more than BC and QC on
publicly funded pharmaceutical drugs.

                       2019-20 Per Capita Provincial Government Health Expenditure
                                            (Forecast Results)

                    AB1        BC1         SK         MB         ON1        QC1         NB         NS         PEI         NL
 Total             $5,118    $4,275     $4,806      $4,759     $4,385     $4,643      $4,718     $4,851     $5,177     $6,022

 Hospitals         $1,956    $1,611     $1,804      $1,892     $1,491     $1,648      $1,979     $2,147     $2,169     $2,381

 Physicians        $1,170       $957       $994     $1,014     $1,068     $1,000        $883       $908        $956       $954

 Drugs              $356        $228       $282       $251       $400        $306       $284       $310        $257       $290
 Source: Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI), National Health Expenditure Trends (NHEX), 1975 to 2019. Statistics
 Canada, Demography Division (population estimates).
 Provinces: Alberta, British Columbia, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia,
 Prince Edward Island, and Newfoundland and Labrador.
 1
  Comparator provinces: Alberta, British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec.

As highlighted in the MacKinnon Panel report, when comparing expenditures with other Canadian
provinces, there are opportunities to explore whether similar initiatives used in other provinces can
help lower costs in Alberta. The AHS Performance Review identified opportunities for AHS to reduce
costs and improve health outcomes by using hospital resources more efficiently. The ministry is also
pursuing opportunities to better align physician compensation arrangements, and if appropriate
align government-sponsored health benefit coverage to that of comparable provinces, as well as
continue to reduce drug costs through the work of the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance.


Performance Indicator 2.b
     Cost of standard hospital stay

                                     Prior Years’ Results                                                     2019-20
         2015-16                2016-17                    2017-18                  2018-19                    Actual

         $8,034                 $8,067                     $7,893                    $7,988                Not Available
 Source: Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI): Canadian MIS Database (CMDB); Alberta Health Discharge Abstract
 Database (DAD).

This indicator is used to monitor the cost of a hospital stay after adjusting for differences in the
acuity of patients a hospital serves, using nationally calculated adjustments. This standardization


Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                                 35
Results Analysis



allows direct comparison across sites and jurisdictions of how efficiently and effectively acute care
hospital services are provided. It does not compare quality or satisfaction for the services delivered.

Results Analysis

The prior years’ results indicate that the cost of a standard hospital stay in Alberta remains around
$8,000. As shown in the following table, Alberta’s hospital stay cost is higher than other provinces
and substantially higher than the comparator provinces of British Columbia (BC), Ontario (ON) and
Quebec (QC).

                                2018-19 Cost of Standard Hospital Stay by Province
      AB1          BC1          SK           MB         ON1          QC1       NB           NS          PEI          NL
     $7,988      $6,464       $7,263      $6,332       $5,484      $5,922    $5,904      $6,082       $6,558      $6,248
 Source: Canadian Institute for Health Information
 Provinces: Alberta, British Columbia, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward
 Island, and Newfoundland and Labrador.
 1
     Comparator provinces: Alberta, British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec.

When assessing whether Albertans are receiving good value for dollars spent on the publicly funded
health system, it is important to also consider quality of care and health outcome indicators. AHS will
be taking these factors into consideration when moving forward on implementing cost savings
initiatives arising from the AHS Performance Review.

Performance Indicator 2.c
     Alternate level of care days

                                        Prior Years’ Results                                               2019-20
          2015-16                  2016-17                  2017-18               2018-19                   Actual

          13.7%                      15.3%                    17.3%                 16.2%                  15.5%
                                                                                                        (preliminary)
 Source: Alberta Health Discharge Abstract Database (DAD).

This indicator is defined as the percentage of all hospital inpatient days when a patient no longer
requires the intensity of care in the hospital setting and the patient’s care could be provided in an
alternate setting in the community. Community settings that better meet the needs of these
hospitalized patients include personal residences, continuing care facilities and rehabilitation
facilities.

Results Analysis

This indicator show modest improvement in 2019-20 results (15.5 per cent) when compared to
2018-19 results (16.2 per cent), however, it is higher than 2015-16 (13.7 per cent) and 2016-17
(15.3 per cent). The ministry is committed to reducing the time patients wait in hospital for the
appropriate level of care. It is anticipated that Alberta’s rate of alternate level of care days will
continue to improve as more continuing care spaces are opened and access to enhanced home care
supports in all health zones is improved.




36                                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                             Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 2.d
     Facility-based beds in community settings

                                    Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                                           2019-20
       2015-16                 2016-17                   2017-18                  2018-19                   Actual

       76.7%                    77.2%                    77.5%                     78.2%                    78.5%
 Source: Alberta Health Services.

This indicator tracks the percentage of facility-based spaces in a community setting (mental health
and addiction, long-term care, designated supportive living and sub-acute care outside acute care) as
a proportion of all spaces (including both community facilities and acute care hospitals).

Results Analysis

AHS is responsible for implementing operational contracts and annually reporting the facility spaces
in service. As of March 31, 2020, 78.5 per cent of facility-based spaces are outside of an acute care
hospital setting. This result represents 2,785 mental health and addiction spaces, 15,665 long-term
care spaces, 11,853 designated supportive living spaces, 256 community palliative and hospice
spaces, and 472 sub-acute spaces in auxiliary hospitals. The percentage of spaces in the community
is expected to rise as the government’s investments expand capacity across the range of facility-
based care available to Albertans.

Adding new continuing care spaces can reduce the number of people waiting in hospital for an
appropriate space and/or decrease the amount of time people spend waiting, improving an
individual’s quality of life, freeing-up hospital spaces for those who need them, and decreasing
overall health system costs.

The government is committed to developing new continuing care spaces quickly and cost-effectively
and has begun to implement a new approach in order to achieve this. Government will partner with
community operators to support the cost-effective addition of new continuing care spaces, including
providing an opportunity for operators with existing spaces to enter into contracts for the provision
of publicly funded care in these spaces. Communities with priority need for new continuing care
spaces will be identified, ensuring new spaces are added or developed where they are most needed.

The government is also making progress on adding facility-based mental health and addiction spaces
in the community to expand options to support Albertans in choosing an option for care that best
meets their needs.

Performance Measure 2.e
     Annual rate of operational expenditures

                             Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                         2019-20              2019-20
      2015-16             2016-17              2017-18              2018-19               Target               Actual


       4.2%                3.1%                 2.7%                 3.3%                 1.0%                 2.1%
 Source: Ministry Consolidated Statement of Revenue and Expenses as presented in the Financial Information section of the
 Ministry of Health Annual Report.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                            37
Results Analysis



This measure is defined as the year-over-year percentage change in the Ministry Total Expenses per
published Statement of Revenue and Expenses less infrastructure support. It is used to monitor the
trend of financial resources used for the Ministry of Health and is an indicator of fiscal sustainability
and efficiency of the health system.

Results Analysis

The 2019-20 result shows operational expenditures grew by 2.1 per cent when compared to
2018-19 operational expenditures. This was a lower annual rate of growth than shown under Prior
Year’ Results, but is higher than the 2019-20 target of one per cent. Additional information about
2019-20 ministry expenditures is provided in the Financial Information section of the annual report.

The government is committed to controlling costs by improving the efficiency and effectiveness of
the health system and supporting Albertans in maintaining their health and wellbeing. This includes
implementing recommendations from the AHS Performance Review and examining best practices
from other provinces to identify opportunities for improving health outcomes, while achieving cost
savings.

Outcome Three: Albertans have increased access to health care professionals and the
mix of professionals that best meets their needs

Outcome statement |
Albertans can choose their care from competent and accountable health care professionals who are
delivering high-quality and safe care. This may include physicians, nurses, pharmacists, paramedics,
psychologists, dietitians, dentists, mental health counsellors, rehabilitation therapists, social
workers and others. The right number, mix and distribution of professionals, working to their full
scope of practice, align with health needs across the province and are supported by fiscally
sustainable compensation models.

Key Objectives

3.1   Improve Albertans’ choice of health professionals by increasing access to nurse
      practitioners and midwives, while also expanding scopes of practice of other
      professionals, and removing barriers that limit health care providers from working to
      their full scope of practice.

The Ministry of Health is committed to working with primary health care partners toward the
shared goal of building a primary health care system that puts people, families and communities at
the centre of the ministry’s work. In 2019-20, the ministry invested $240.6 million in Alberta’s 41
Primary Care Networks (PCNs) to support delivery of team-based primary care. In PCNs, family
physicians collaborate with teams of health care professionals (such as nurses, dietitians,
psychologists, social workers, and pharmacists) to meet the primary health care needs of their
communities. Approximately 80 per cent of Alberta’s primary care doctors are part of a PCN, which
range in size from five physicians with 4,568 patients, to 477 physicians with 327,900 patients. PCNs
implement processes and standards that support shared accountability for comprehensive primary
care that best serves the needs of the community, including coordinated health services across the
continuum of care.

Over the past year, AHS and PCNs collaborated to develop Zone Service Plans for each of the five
health zones covering the province. The plans support PCNs, AHS and community-based
organizations to identify and prioritize opportunities to align, integrate and share services across


38                                                                           Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                       Results Analysis



Zones. In particular, the Zone Service Plans incorporated better coordination of services for five
patient populations – maternal, well-at-risk, chronic comorbid, addiction and mental health, and frail
elderly. Key areas of focus include specialty access, care transitions, addiction and mental health
services and opioid response. The plans were approved by the ministry in March 2020, and will
move to implementation in 2020-21. Implementation of these service plans is expected to lead to
less duplication and fewer gaps in primary and community services across the Zones.

In 2019, the ministry implemented the PCN Nurse Practitioner (NP) Support Program to increase
the presence of NPs in primary and community care. As of September 2019, there were 50 NPs
working in PCNs. Budget 2019 committed $3 million in 2019-20 to support PCNs in hiring and
funding the equivalent of an additional 30 full-time NPs. The NP program aims to increase access to
primary health care by helping extend PCNs’ operating hours to reduce reliance on emergency
departments, improving access in rural/remote areas and for underserved populations, and
improving support for Albertans in managing chronic disease.

The government has committed to making changes so that Albertans can receive care from the most
appropriate health care professionals who are working to their full scope of practice. This includes
increasing the number of NPs and midwives, and expanding the scope of practice of nursing
professionals where appropriate, as well as making better use of paramedics’ full scope of practice.
For example, in fall 2019, government removed funding restrictions for midwifery services, and
Community Paramedicine programs are ongoing in AHS’ Central and North Zones, including
Mobile Integrated Health Teams, who work with physicians and community health care providers to
deliver on-site, non-emergency care to residents of pre-selected supportive living facilities.

Amendments to Alberta’s Licensed Practical Nurses Profession Regulation are helping to create a
more efficient and cost-effective health system by expanding the scope of practice for licensed
practical nurses (LPNs). The changes, which came into effect on February 1, 2020, allow LPNs to
offer more services, including administering blood or blood products and dispensing certain drugs.
More than 16,000 LPNs work in Alberta – most are AHS staff working in a variety of settings,
including hospitals, community health centres, continuing care facilities, urgent care centres and
home care.

Albertans want to be confident that their health care providers are working to the highest standards
and accountability. Throughout the year the ministry collaborated with a number of regulatory
colleges regarding proposed amendments to standards of practice for their membership.

3.2   Develop and implement innovative and fiscally-sustainable approaches to provider
      compensation and resourcing that supports high-quality care and collaborative practice
      within interdisciplinary team-based environments.

Provider compensation accounts for a large proportion of the costs of delivering health care to
Albertans. With increasing financial pressure on the health system, the ministry is exploring new
cost-effective approaches to health service delivery and new provider compensation models that
incorporate best practices from other jurisdictions across Canada. For example, AHS’ Operational
Best Practice initiative uses comparative data from other provinces to establish targets, such as
worked hours per patient day and supply cost per patient day, to measure progress towards
reducing costs while maintaining or improving care.

To keep Alberta’s health system sustainable, there is a pressing need for the government to bring
costs in line with other provinces, including keeping physician spending at current levels.
Expenditures on physician compensation and development alone make up about 25 per cent of the
provincial health budget – approximately $5.4 billion annually. The MacKinnon Panel recommended
the government limit the increasing cost of physician services by moving away from the


Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                    39
Results Analysis



fee-for-service (FFS) model for physician compensation, for example, and towards alternative
relationship plans.

The FFS model is the most common remuneration model for physicians in Alberta and across
Canada. Approximately 83 per cent of Alberta’s expenditures on physician services use the FFS
model, which is the highest proportion in Canada. The amount paid to the physician for each service
or procedure is set out in Alberta’s Schedule of Medical Benefits.

Alberta and other jurisdictions also use physician compensation models that are different than the
FFS model to allow for more comprehensive, patient-centred care, while providing physicians
predictable funding. In Alberta these arrangements include Academic or Clinical Alternative
Relationship Plans (ARPs), including a Blended Capitation Model (BCM). An independent review of
the Academic Medicine Health Services Program (AMHSP) was completed in 2019-20 to identify
improvements to governance of the program and in preparation for a new AMHSP master
agreement.

Clinical ARPs pay clinicians for delivering a defined set of clinical services to a target population, for
example, people diagnosed with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Edema. A BCM arrangement pays a
fee for a bundle of services for each person under the regular care of a physician, combined with FFS
as necessary, for any additional services provided. The goal of the BCM model is to provide Albertans
with increased access to primary health care by enabling a “medical home” concept through strong
relationships to their primary care physicians and improved continuity of care, similar to other
Clinical ARPs. Modernizing physician funding through ARPs provides opportunities to move away
from a focus on quantity of care embedded in the FFS model of compensation towards a greater
focus on quality of care. To encourage more physicians into the Clinical ARP model, the ministry is
streamlining the application process.

Negotiation and consultation between the government and the Alberta Medical Association (AMA)
on a new agreement began in November 2019 and continued into February 2020, including
mediation commencing in January. Discussions ceased without an agreement and faced with
projected cost overruns of $2 billion over the next three years the government implemented a new
physician funding framework on March 31, 2020, which maintained the budget at $5.4 billion.

The new physician funding framework is being carefully monitored for impacts to physicians and
health care delivery, and necessary adjustments – for example enabling provision of care through
virtual means and incentivizing rural physicians by removing the cap on premiums under the
Rural Remote Northern Program to improve access in rural and remote communities. Of eleven
proposals, eight have been fully implemented, one rescinded (complex modifiers), and two delayed
(overhead and clinical stipends to allow further review by AHS). The new framework, also
established a Physician Compensation Advisory Committee with physician and public members to
examine all aspects of the physician services funding model and provide recommendations to the
Minister, supporting the delivery of high-quality, patient-focused health services.

The AHS Performance Review report recommended that in alignment with government’s physician
negotiations, AHS should address radiologist compensation to bring it more in line with other
provinces. On March 12, 2020, AHS moved forward on this recommendation by providing a one-year
notice that existing contracts and agreements would terminate on March 31, 2021, and that a
Request for Proposal (RFP) would be issued to ensure transparent and fair compensation across
Alberta. During this period, service will continue and patient care will not be affected.




40                                                                           Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                              Results Analysis



Performance Metrics

Performance Indicator 3.a
     Percentage of Alternative Relationship Plan payments of total physician payments

                                     Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                                              2019-20
                                                                                                               Actual
       2015-16                  2016-17                   2017-18                   2018-19

         13%                       13%                      13%                       13%                 Not Available
 Source: Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI): National Physician Database (NPDB); Alternative Payment Information
 File for Alberta.

This indicator tracks the percentage of total physician payments (clinical and non-clinical) that are
made under the terms of an Alternative Relationship Plan (ARP), which is an arrangement that
compensates physicians by a method other than fee-for-service. The intent is to increase the
percentage as a way to diversify physician payments and achieve greater cost predictability for both
physicians and government and improved patient care.

Results Analysis

ARP payments as a percentage of total physician payments has remained at 13 per cent over the
prior four years. The ministry is developing strategies to increase physician interest and
participation in ARPs, including streamlined application and approval processes.

Performance Indicator 3.b
     Percentage of Albertans who had access to a regular health provider

                                     Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                                               2019
         2015                      2016                     2017                      2018                    Actual

      80.5%                     82.0%                     83.6%                    83.7%                  Not Available1
 Source: Canadian Community Health Survey, Statistics Canada.
 1
  The 2019 Survey release date was postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

This indicator tracks the percentage of Albertans aged 12 or older who participated in the Canadian
Community Health Survey and responded that they have a regular health care provider. The survey
describes a regular health care provider as one health professional that a person regularly sees or
talks to when a person needs care or health advice.

Results Analysis

Prior years’ results show a small year-over-year improvement and in 2018, 83.7 per cent of
Albertans had access to a regular health provider.

Having a regular health care provider is important for early screening, prevention through health
and wellness advice, diagnosis, and treatment of a health issue, as well as ensuring good continuity
of care and connections to other health and social services. The desired result is to increase the
percentage of Albertans that have a regular health care provider. This is consistent with progress
towards the following provincial primary health care goals:


Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                             41
Results Analysis



        Timely access to appropriate primary care services delivered by a regular health care
         provider or team;
        Co-ordinated, seamless delivery of primary care services through a patient’s ‘medical home’
         and integration of primary care with other levels of the health care system;
        Efficient delivery of high-quality, evidence-informed primary care services; and
        Involvement of Albertans as active partners in their own health and wellness.

Alberta’s Primary Care Networks are involved in a variety of initiatives that support provincial and
health zone primary care goals, including adopting a ‘medical home’ approach in their practices. This
approach strengthens the connection between a patient and regular health care provider to improve
access to care, chronic disease prevention and management, continuity of care, and innovations in
primary health care including telemedicine and virtual care.

Performance Indicator 3.c
     Percentage of Licensed Practical Nurses relative to Registered Nurses

                                      Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                                                2019
         2015                      2016                      2017                     2018                     Actual


         34.2%                    36.5%                      38.0%                   40.0%                      41.6%
 Source: Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI).

This indicator measures Licensed Practical Nurses (LPNs) relative to Registered Nurses (RNs),
which includes Registered Psychiatric Nurses but excludes Nurse Practitioners. LPNs and RNs are
different types of nursing professionals with different scopes of practice that align to their training.
Decisions on health workforce employment and utilization are the responsibility of AHS and other
employers. The AHS Performance Review identified opportunities to optimize the skill mix and
better leverage the various skill levels of RNs, LPNs and Health Care Aides to ensure efficiency and
effectiveness of AHS’ complement of nursing staff.

Results Analysis
In 2019, 41.6 per cent of all licensed and registered nurses (excluding Nurse Practitioners) in
Alberta were LPNs. This is consistent with the annual increase in the percentage of LPNs relative to
RNs over the past five years in both Alberta and Ontario, as provided in the following table.

                 Percentage of LPNs relative to RNs (Alberta and comparator provinces)

                         Alberta             British Columbia              Ontario                    Quebec
     2015                 34.2%                     30.6%                   42.6%                      41.0%
     2016                 36.5%                     30.1%                   45.3%                      39.5%
     2017                 38.0%                     29.9%                   47.1%                      38.7%
     2018                 40.0%                     30.1%                   48.8%                      38.6%
     2019                 41.6%                     30.2%                   50.8%                      38.5%
 Source: Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) Nursing in Canada, 2019 data tables.




42                                                                                               Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                              Results Analysis



In the past year, both RNs and LPNs have had their scope of practice expanded in Alberta. These
changes strengthen the health system by enabling health professionals to practice to the full extent
of their competence and training.

Performance Indicator 3.d
     Percentage of Nurse Practitioners relative to Family Medicine Physicians

                                      Prior Years’ Results                                     2019
         2015                      2016                      2017             2018            Actual

        7.9%                       8.4%                      8.7%             9.6%       Not Available
 Source: Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI).

This indicator tracks the percentage of Nurse Practitioners (NPs) relative to Family Medicine
Physicians. NPs are registered nurses with post-graduate degrees and advanced knowledge and
skills. They are trained to assess, diagnose, treat, order diagnostic tests, prescribe medications, make
referrals to specialists and manage overall care. NPs often work closely with physicians and other
health professions as part of a team. Some NPs work independently and manage their own clinics.
Family medicine physicians include general practitioners, as well as family medicine specialists and
emergency family medicine specialists certified by the College of Family Physicians of Canada.

Results Analysis

In 2018, the percentage of NPs relative to Family Medicine Physicians was 9.6 per cent, which is an
increase over the previous year and consistent with the four-year trend. In the following table,
comparator provinces of British Columbia, Ontario and Quebec also show a year-over-year increase
in the percentage of NPs relative to Family Medicine Physicians.

                    Percentage of NPs relative to Family Medicine Physicians
                                   (Alberta and comparator provinces)

                        Alberta             British Columbia        Ontario          Quebec

     2015                 7.9%                      5.4%            16.7%             3.1%

     2016                 8.4%                      6.2%            18.0%             3.9%

     2017                 8.7%                      6.6%            18.7%             4.2%

     2018                 9.6%                      6.9%            19.1%             4.9%
 Source: Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI).

The government is encouraging an increase in the number of NPs in primary care settings through
the PCN NP Support Program. Enabling NPs to provide care in community-based settings helps to
achieve the five identified strategic outcomes for primary health care: access to primary health care;
safety and quality of care; continuity of care; care transitions; and, person experience and outcomes.
The ministry is working with the Nurse Practitioner Association of Alberta to understand
implications of funding models on NP recruitment for primary care and to enable optimal NP scope
of practice.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                           43
Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 3.e
     Average wait time from general practitioner to orthopedic surgeon consult

                                      Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                         2019-20
       2015-16                   2016-17             2017-18      2018-19                 Actual

         22.4                      27.7                28.6         29.0                   31.0
 Source: Alberta Bone and Joint Health Institute.


The indicator tracks the provincial average wait time (in weeks) from the day a surgeon’s office
receives the referral from the patient’s doctor to the patient’s first appointment with the orthopedic
surgeon. Orthopedic surgeons treat the musculoskeletal system, which includes bones, joints,
ligaments, muscles, nerves and tendons. Common orthopedic surgical procedures include knee and
hip replacements.

Results Analysis

Results for 2019-20 show that Albertans waited an average of 31 weeks for their first appointment
with an orthopedic surgeon. This is two weeks longer than in 2018-19.

The ministry is reviewing every phase of the surgical journey that patients experience, from the
consultations with primary care physicians and specialists to receiving their required procedures,
including improved referral wait times.

The ministry is also working with primary health care partners to implement telephone and
electronic advice between primary care providers and specialists. This will provide appropriate and
timely care to Albertans, and will decrease the time that Albertans wait for an appointment with a
specialist.

Outcome Four: Albertans are supported by accessible and coordinated mental health and
addiction services

Outcome statement |
Preventing, stabilizing and supporting recovery from mental health issues or addiction will reduce
the significant negative impact of these challenges on individuals, families, caregivers and
communities. The ministry will continue to work with its partners to address mental health and
addiction challenges.

Key Objectives

4.1    Implement a mental health and addiction strategy to move toward a quality,
       coordinated, connected and easily accessible mental health and addiction system.

The government’s commitment to the mental health and well-being of Albertans was established
through the appointment of an Associate Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and allocation of
funds for mental health and addiction services and supports. Budget 2019 committed $140 million
over four years to expand access to a continuum of mental health and addiction services including
awareness, prevention, intervention, treatment and recovery.




44                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                        Results Analysis



In November 2019, the Minister of Health appointed the Mental Health and Addictions Advisory
Council to develop strategic recommendations to increase access to recovery-oriented addiction and
mental health services. The Council is to provide their final report with recommended strategic
actions to the Minister of Health and the Associate Minister of Mental Health and Addictions in fall
2020, which will inform the development of a new provincial addiction and mental health strategy.

The advisory council, made up of 23 members with a range of personal and professional experience,
is building on the work completed in past years, namely the Valuing Mental Health: Report of the
Alberta Mental Health Review Committee and the Minister’s Opioid Emergency Response
Commission recommendations. The new Council engaged with stakeholders from existing mental
health and addictions advisory and integration committees, people with lived experience,
representatives from Indigenous communities, subject matter experts, community service providers
and industry representatives, among others.

Mental health and addiction services are delivered in various settings by a mix of public and private
service providers, and are funded by government, philanthropic organizations, and by individuals
through user fees or private insurance. It is important to ensure that legislation supports Albertans’
health and safety in all settings and situations, while complying with the Canadian Charter of Rights
and Freedoms.

In July 2019, the Alberta Court of Queen’s Bench found that sections of the Mental Health Act did not
comply with the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Following the Court’s decision,
government launched a public engagement initiative to gather feedback to inform changes to the Act
and ensure it meets legal requirements. Input was gathered from nearly 3,400 individuals via a
public online survey. Focused meetings were held with stakeholders such as police organizations;
family and patient advocacy representatives; Indigenous representatives; Mental Health Review
Panel members; health professions; other ministries; and, AHS (including input from clinicians as
required). Changes aim to more effectively protect the rights of patients, improve the care provided
to them, and modernize the Act, as well as responding to some long-standing concerns of key
partners.

Alberta’s Mental Health Services Protection Act also provides a foundation to ensure safe, quality
addiction and mental health care. The Act provides authority to license residential addiction
treatment facilities and outlines core requirements that must be met. Effective November 1, 2019, all
residential addiction treatment providers in Alberta must be licensed in accordance with the Act.
The licensing requirements ensure people seeking recovery and their families have safe and quality
choices for treatment and recovery options.

4.2   Expand access to a continuum of mental health and addiction services to provide a
      range of appropriate supports for individuals, families and communities.

Mental health and addiction services may be clinical or non-clinical. Clinical care by health care
professionals encompasses diagnosing, treating, or managing a mental health disorder, and may
include treatment with medication and intensive or specialized care. Non-clinical care includes
health promotion and prevention, harm reduction strategies, awareness-raising, screening, brief
intervention and referrals to treatments. The government is committed to supporting a continuum
of accessible and coordinated mental health and addiction services, including awareness, recovery-
oriented prevention, harm reduction and treatment, to support and promote the recovery journey
and reduce the significant negative impact these challenges have on individuals, families, and
communities.

The ministry funds prevention initiatives such as Alberta 211, Honouring Life, and Recovery
Colleges and Peer Support through the Canadian Mental Health Association. Initiatives such as these


Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                     45
Results Analysis



help to increase access to critical supports and services. At the end of 2019, a new online eReferral
Advice Request process through Alberta Netcare was established to enable primary care physicians
to request advice from a Child and Adolescent Psychiatry clinical specialist to support timely patient
care in the community. Primary care physicians play a key role in identifying and assessing mental
health conditions that can impact Albertans of all ages, and in coordinating their care, including care
provided by other physicians or other mental health care providers or supports.

On November 27, 2019, government announced a $22 million investment to deliver more mental
health supports for post-secondary students. Students at the 26 post-secondary institutions across
Alberta will have more access to mental health services available through AHS. Additional supports
for students include text and chat platforms, and professional counselling by phone through a
partnership between Alberta 211 and Kids Help Phone.

Alberta 211 also provides referrals to mental health and addiction services across Alberta. An
increasing number of mental health services and supports can be accessed online or by phone, which
is particularly effective in improving access for those in rural and remote areas as well as during
physical distancing measures implemented during the pandemic. Phone help and crisis lines have
seen a surge during the pandemic, and demand is expected to continue in 2020-21.

Government is working with partners to develop a new digital navigation and crisis hub that will
provide system navigation and seamless transfers to help lines such as the Kids Help Line and the
family violence information line, and other digital crisis supports. This will ensure service navigation
and crisis support will be available to all Albertans, regardless of where they live. The integrated
nature of 211 and crisis support is critical to ensure Albertans receive the services that best meet
their immediate needs.

According to the Centre for Suicide Prevention, in 2019 the rate of deaths by suicide in Alberta was
12.7 per 100,000 population. Certain groups in Alberta are disproportionately affected by suicide,
including Indigenous communities and youth. The ministries of Health and Children’s Services are
continuing projects that aim to reduce the youth suicide rate by providing supports and services;
training, education and awareness; and research, data and knowledge.

In September 2019, the Centre for Suicide Prevention announced the launch of a community-led
resource toolkit to help develop, with ministry funding support, life promotion strategies and
activities for Indigenous youth and communities. The government is also providing $12.5 million
over four years to AHS to expand Honouring Life funding to all interested First Nations and
Métis Settlements to support resiliency, empowerment, and holistic suicide prevention initiatives.
AHS is working with more than 50 Indigenous communities and organizations on program
applications. More than 36 community projects are currently underway.

Published in September 2019, two new graphic novels developed for First Nations and Métis youth
will help start conversations about suicide prevention. More than 100 Indigenous youth from across
Alberta, in addition to First Nations and Métis producers, writers and artists, were engaged in the
development of the novels.

In 2019-20, almost $900,000 was invested to support Indigenous Albertans and communities in
establishing a continuum of addiction and mental health services. As part of government’s
commitment to establish 4,000 new publicly funded addiction and mental health treatment beds, on
December 4, 2019, the province announced $1.4 million funding over three years to Poundmaker’s
Lodge Treatment Centres to add space to treat 900 more people over three years. These treatment
centres blend Indigenous-healing methodologies with western practices in alignment with best and
wise practice standards. The centres employ elders, addiction physicians, nurses, pharmacists,
therapists, psychologists and other health professionals. The new funding will help create 28 new


46                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                       Results Analysis



residential addiction treatment beds and fund seven existing beds at the Iskwew Healing Lodge as
well as upgrading five medically supported detoxification beds.

In 2019-20, $6 million was dedicated to expand programs to support Albertans in crisis, including
police and crisis teams, provincial family violence treatment programs, diversion programs, and by
developing mental health court models.

Supporting Albertans in crisis will ensure that more people have access to early intervention to
reduce the mental health impact of trauma. Diversion programs, drug treatment courts and mental
health courts will also reduce the need for more costly criminal justice interventions by diverting
Albertans to the appropriate addiction and mental health services.

4.3   Develop and implement opioid response strategies that support increased access to
      opioid treatment and recovery services for individuals and their families.

The opioid crisis is having an enormous impact on individuals, families, friends and communities.
Reducing deaths related to opioid use requires a coordinated, recovery-oriented, public health
response that spans prevention, harm reduction services, treatment and post-treatment supports.
The government continues to monitor demands on the health care system from the opioid crisis, and
substance-use more broadly, and is working with partners and civil society groups to meet and,
where possible, reduce these demands through recovery supports and prevention efforts. In
particular, the ministry is working with First Nations groups in Alberta to improve access to
culturally sensitive treatment and recovery supports.

Budget 2019 included a commitment of $10 million annually over four years to address the opioid
crisis through programs such as a virtual opioid dependence program, training for primary care
physicians, and improvement in addressing opioid addictions in emergency departments and
corrections services. By September 2020, more Albertans will be able to access psychosocial
supports via opioid dependency programs including addiction counsellors and therapists, and peer
support programs. In addition, $71 million over four years will fund publicly funded residential
addiction treatment and mental health spaces and $28 million will support the creation of new
medically assisted detoxification spaces as part of the government’s commitment to create more
than 4,000 publicly funded spaces to support recovery from opioid addictions, with expanded spaces
starting in summer 2020.

In Edmonton, as part of the Addiction and Mental Health Day Hospital initiative, patients can benefit
from a therapeutic setting while being able to remain in their home. The ministry is reviewing needs
and implementation options to ensure that home care service enhancements such as this will be
most beneficial for Albertans.

Developmental Pathways (formerly called InRoads) are online resources that support health
professionals providing addiction and mental health services in primary care and other settings.
Care providers continue to access the learning modules to enhance skills in promotion, prevention,
and harm reduction.

Work continues with physicians to ensure general practitioners have training in opioid replacement
therapy. The College of Physicians and Surgeons of Alberta launched a course in mid-June 2019 to
train its members on how to safely reduce the prescription of powerful opioid drugs that have a high
incidence of addiction.

AHS’ Virtual Opioid Dependency Program (VODP), accessible from anywhere in the province,
enables same day access to begin medication, if appropriate, and offers transition supports for
moves between emergency departments, detoxification centres, and corrections services. In


Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                    47
Results Analysis



addition, by March 2020, 107 emergency departments across the province had implemented
treatment and rapid follow-up in the community for clients with opioid use disorder. Sixty per cent
of patients accessing this program were found to have continued with their treatment four months
after treatment was initiated in the emergency department.

Beginning in 2019-20, Canadian Mental Health Association (CMHA)-Calgary received $3 million in
grant funding over three years to spread the successful model of recovery colleges and peer support
to Alberta’s five health zones. CMHA-Calgary is collaborating with communities to establish the
required networks and infrastructure. Recovery college programs have been established in Calgary,
Edmonton, Red Deer, Wood Buffalo, and Lethbridge.

On August 19, 2019, the Supervised Consumption Services (SCS) Review Committee was established
to evaluate the social and economic impacts of current and proposed SCS sites. The committee heard
from thousands of Albertans through public town halls and meetings with local leaders, front-line
responders, community groups, business owners, harm reduction agencies and others impacted by
this work. Input was also collected through online surveys and email submissions.

The final report, Impact: A Socio-Economic Review Of Supervised Consumption Sites in Alberta,
released in March 2020, was informed by public input and pre-existing, third party data and
research. The public report can be viewed online at www.alberta.ca/supervised-consumption-
services-review.aspx.

The report provides valuable information about the issues and impacts SCS sites have on those living
and working in the communities surrounding them. The report found that Albertans want their
family, friends and community members struggling with addiction to be safe and have access to
appropriate care. The government will make sure the path forward on this issue strikes an
appropriate balance to not only protect communities, but ensure Albertans struggling with
substance use disorder have access to a continuum of care, including recovery-oriented treatment
services.

Some key findings of the report included inadequate oversight and a lack of accountability
mechanisms, lack of focus on referrals to recovery oriented services, a need for improved needle
debris and needle distribution policies, issues with erratic behaviour near the sites and inadequate
community consultation prior to sites opening. Findings will inform the development of a
comprehensive, long-term approach to protect communities and improve recovery-oriented
supports for Albertans dealing with addiction. Government has extended grant funding for existing
SCS and Opioid Prevention Services sites until September 30, 2020, while determining the best way
to move forward on a city-by-city basis and improve consistency across all sites in 2020-21.

The opioid crisis has had a significant financial impact on all governments across Canada. Alberta’s
Opioid Damages and Health Care Costs Recovery Act, which received Royal Assent on
December 5, 2019, will help Alberta hold opioid manufacturers and wholesalers accountable for
opioid-related health-care costs and damages. The Act enables Alberta to participate in a proposed
national opioid class action lawsuit.




48                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                        Results Analysis



Performance Metrics

Performance Indicator 4.a
     Unplanned mental health readmissions to hospital

                            Prior Years’ Results                         2019-20          2019-20
     2015-16             2016-17              2017-18        2018-19      Target           Actual

       8.6%                8.8%                 8.8%          9.8%        8.6%            10.4%
                                                                                         (April –
                                                                                        December)
 Source: Alberta Health Discharge Abstract Database (DAD).

This measure represents the proportion of non-elective (unplanned) readmissions to an acute care
hospital in Alberta for selected mental illness within 30 days of a patient being discharged from a
hospital stay for their mental illness. The measure excludes patients who have mental health
disorders that require scheduled follow‐up care.

Visits to facilities and programs not designated as acute inpatient care facilities (e.g., hospital
emergency departments, urgent care centres, community clinics) are not included. The selected
mental illnesses include: substance use disorders; schizophrenia, delusional, and non-organic
psychotic disorders; mood/affective disorders; anxiety disorders; and, disorders of adult personality
and behavior.

Results Analysis

Available results for 2019-20 show that 10.4 per cent of those patients previously discharged from a
hospital stay for mental illness had an unplanned mental health readmission within 30 days. This is
higher than prior years’ results and almost two per cent higher than the target of 8.6 per cent.

Unplanned readmissions within 30 days for mental health patients is used as an indicator of
continuity of care and accessibility of care in the community. It should be noted, however, that
readmission may involve other external factors including the nature of the population served by the
facility and the nature of addiction and mental health issues. Frequent hospitalizations may be an
indication there are challenges with appropriateness of care, medication access and use, and
community supports. Readmissions may indicate a lack of follow-up care or transition to care in the
community.

While not all readmissions can be avoided, monitoring readmissions can assist in planning
appropriate follow‐up care after hospitalization. Hospital care for people diagnosed with a mental
illness typically aims to stabilize acute symptoms. Once stabilized the individual can be discharged,
and subsequent care and support to prevent relapse or complications are offered through primary
care and outpatient and community programs.

The government is committed to improving care in the community, so Albertans have access to
services closer to home. Going forward, government will develop a provincial mental health and
addiction strategy that will improve access to care and continuity of care.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                     49
Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 4.b
     Emergency department visits where a mental health issue was identified for the first
     time in the past two years

                                    Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                                           2019-20
       2015-16                 2016-17                   2017-18                  2018-19                   Actual

        31.0                     28.7                      27.5                     26.2                    25.4
                                                                                                        (preliminary)
 Source: Alberta Health Discharge Abstract Database (DAD), Alberta’s physician claims database,
 Alberta Ambulatory Care Reporting System (AACRS), Provincial Population Registry.

This indicator tracks the number of number of mental health-related emergency department (ED)
visits (per 100 mental health ED visits) where the patient had received no mental health services
from a physician, or in a hospital or emergency department in the past two years.

Results Analysis

The current preliminary results show that just over a quarter of mental health ED visits (25.4 per
100 visits) were patients where their ED visit identified a mental health issue for the first time in the
past two years. This is a slight improvement on the 2018-19 result (26.2 per 100 visits).

First identification of a mental health issue in the emergency department may indicate a lack of
access to services available in the community, especially early intervention and screening.
Government is investing in improving access to a range of mental health and addiction services and
supports in the community. Implementation of actions arising from the new Mental Health and
Addiction Strategy will support continued improvement in this indicator, by ensuring Albertans
experiencing a mental health issue have options other than EDs to help them improve their mental
health.

Performance Indicator 4.c
     Emergency department visits due to alcohol use

                                                                                                           2019-20
                                     Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                                            Actual
        2015-16                 2016-17                   2017-18                 2018-19

          959                      948                      939                      941                     928
                                                                                                        (preliminary)
 Source: Alberta Ambulatory Care database; Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan, End of Fiscal-Year (March 31) Adjusted
 Population Registry Files Statistics Canada; Canadian population, 2011.

This indicator provides the number of visits to emergency departments (EDs) and urgent care
centres related to use of alcohol per 100,000 population. The population excludes members of the
Armed Forces, RCMP, inmates in federal penitentiaries, or those who have opted out of the Alberta
Health Care Insurance Plan.

Results Analysis

The preliminary 2019-20 result (928 ED visits due to alcohol per 100,000 population) shows a slight
improvement when compared to the 2018-19 result (941 ED visits). It should be noted that the
2019-20 results are preliminary and are subject to change. It is possible that decreasing use of


50                                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                        Results Analysis



alcohol among youth may be a contributing factor to the drop in ED visits. The most recent results
from the Canadian Student Tobacco, Alcohol and Drug Survey among youth in grades 7-12 show that
fewer youth were using alcohol in the past 12 months in 2018-19 (38.6%) compared to 2016-17
(46.8%). High risk drinking among students in grade 7-12 also decreased in 2018-19 to
23.4 per cent from 27.4 per cent in 2016-17.

Emergency department clinicians can use a standardized and consistent evidence-based care
pathway to ensure patients receive the best treatment required for their condition. Albertans can
receive help through the Addiction Helpline (1-866-332-2322), a toll free, confidential service that
provides support for those experiencing problems with alcohol, tobacco, other drugs, or gambling,
including information and referral to services. Government is committed to improving access to a
range of mental health and addiction services and supports.

The ministry and the Alberta Gaming, Liquor and Cannabis agency work collaboratively to
implement the province’s Alcohol Strategy, which aims to prevent and reduce alcohol-related harm
by developing a culture of moderation. The issue of alcohol use is complex and misuse impacts costs
associated with health care, criminal justice and lost productivity.

Outcome Five: The well-being of Albertans is supported through population health
initiatives

Outcome statement |
Healthy populations and communities are shaped through a range of social, economic and physical
environmental factors, also known as the social determinants of health. The ministry will continue to
work with its partners on the promotion of health and wellness to encourage Albertans to stay
healthy through policies, programs and initiatives focused on reducing risks to prevent injury and
disease.

Key Objectives

5.1    Prevent chronic conditions, injuries and infections by developing policies that reduce
       risk from environmental and individual risk factors.

AHS’ public health programs provide health promotion as well as disease and injury prevention
programs to individuals, high-risk groups and the broader community. These programs support
health action from pre-conception through old age via a wide range of initiatives including health
promotion education and support and population health surveillance for emerging public health
concerns. Online resources can be accessed through the MyHealth Alberta website
(myhealth.alberta.ca), which offers resources from AHS and Alberta-based partner organizations.

In the fall of 2019, the government initiated a review of Alberta’s Tobacco and Smoking Reduction Act
to assess the effectiveness of the current legislative framework and consider options to further
protect Albertans from the harms of tobacco, vaping, and tobacco-like products. Current legislation
does not explicitly address vaping, which is an emerging health concern. There is an ongoing rise in
the use of these products, especially by young people. Alberta recorded its first case of severe vaping
illness in January 2020 after the Public Health Agency of Canada alerted provincial health officials to
this potential public health concern and asked provinces to report probable and confirmed cases as
part of a national investigation underway.

Public feedback from the review was gathered via an online survey and through meetings with
interest groups, including health experts, academics, educators, law enforcement and


Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                     51
Results Analysis



businesses/manufacturers. Information on the review, including survey highlights and summary
meeting notes are posted on the government website at www.alberta.ca/tobacco-and-smoking-
reduction-review.aspx.

The Chronic Condition and Disease Prevention and Management (CCDPM) task group, under the
direction of the Provincial Primary Care Network Committee, conducted a survey of the current state
of CCDPM programs and services offered in Primary Care Networks across the province. Results of
this project are under review to ensure Albertans are receiving the best care possible and up-to-date
and consistent information about prevention and management of chronic conditions and diseases.

In 2019-20, $1.4 million was provided to the Injury Prevention Centre (IPC) to support programs
and services that work to reduce the incidence and severity of unintentional injury through
prevention efforts. Funding also supported the IPC in administering the Alberta Community Injury
Control Fund, which provides communities with resources to increase awareness of preventable
injuries and improve the well-being of individuals. The IPC funded 21 projects, reaching 78
communities in Alberta, and focused on reducing unintentional injuries from motor vehicle
collisions, falls, drowning, farming, fire, poisoning, or concussion.

Increased cancer prevention and screening efforts (as well as new treatments, technology and
research) are helping more Albertans receive an earlier diagnosis, enter treatment sooner and live
longer. There is more work to be done, and increased focus on innovative cancer prevention and
screening services will help the ministry‘s ongoing cancer-related investments go further.

In 2019-20, the government invested $2.74 million in Alberta’s Tomorrow Project to support
development of a database of ongoing health and lifestyle data for 55,000 Albertans, which is critical
to determining why some people get chronic diseases like cancer. Evidence-informed cancer risk
factor information, as well as other health information and resources are available through the
MyHealth Alberta website. Albertans can also keep track of their screening appointments and results
through the MyHealth Records portal (myhealth.alberta.ca/myhealthrecords), which was launched
in March 2019.

Government released the Alberta Air Quality Notification Protocol: What you need to know to support
Albertans during wildfire or other poor air quality events, and the Alberta Safe Beach Protocol is
available to help beach operators keep recreational waters safe for Albertans.

The First Nations Cancer Prevention and Screening Practices program supports First Nations
communities to develop, implement, and evaluate comprehensive prevention and screening plans. In
the past year, three pilot communities continued implementing initiatives like traditional sweat
ceremonies led by project elders, prevention and screening awareness events, and community
walking groups.

5.2   Safeguard Albertans from communicable diseases through initiatives aimed at
      decreasing sexually transmitted and blood-borne infections, and through immunization
      for vaccine-preventable diseases, such as influenza and measles.

Requirements for reporting infectious diseases are mandated by Alberta’s Communicable Diseases
Regulation. The collection, analysis and interpretation of communicable disease data assists
Alberta’s Chief Medical Officer of Health in fulfilling the duties prescribed in the Public Health Act.
The government monitors communicable disease information, and develops and maintains
notifiable disease management guidelines for health professionals, with input to the guidelines from
medical officers of health, public health nurses, public health inspectors, laboratories, and medical
infectious disease specialists.



52                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                         Results Analysis



Immunization is one of the world’s most successful and cost-effective mechanisms for preventing
disease and protecting the health of the population. Immunization helps individuals develop
immunity to those infectious pathogens (bacteria and viruses) that can cause severe disease and
death. When people are immunized they protect not only themselves, but also help reduce the
likelihood of outbreaks and epidemics which can severely affect more vulnerable people around
them, like seniors and those with existing health conditions, as seen with influenza outbreaks.
Alberta has one of the most comprehensive immunization programs across Canada and in 2019-20,
the Government of Alberta spent $51.25 million purchasing vaccines against 15 vaccine-preventable
diseases (chicken pox, diphtheria, haemophilus influenza type B, hepatitis B, human papillomavirus,
influenza, measles, meningococcal, mumps, pertussis, pneumococcal, polio, rotavirus, rubella and
tetanus).

During the initial portion of the 2019-20 school year, AHS public health nurses offered immunization
in the school setting to students in grades six and nine, as per Alberta’s routine immunization
schedule, and to children in grades one to nine with incomplete immunizations. In response to the
COVID-19 pandemic, public health nurses and other staff were redeployed to assist in testing and
contact tracing. Schools were closed to students beginning March 16, 2020. The immunization
program is expected to resume, once public health staffing capacity has been restored and in-class
learning resumes across Alberta.

An outbreak of pertussis (whooping cough) in communities in AHS’ South Zone was declared on
October 15, 2019. The outbreak of this vaccine-preventable disease was contained and declared over
on February 6, 2020.

In the past number of years, sexually transmitted infections, such as chlamydia, gonorrhea, and
syphilis have been an ongoing public health concern in Alberta. Alberta’s Chief Medical Officer of
Health declared a provincial syphilis outbreak in July 2019, due to a rapid increase in syphilis cases.
A provincial outbreak coordination committee made up of provincial health officials was formed in
response, and this work is ongoing. The committee developed a coordinated strategy and
determined concrete actions to increase testing for sexually transmitted infections and follow-up,
promote public awareness about prevention and treatment, and reduce the overall number of
syphilis cases in Alberta, including cases of congenital syphilis in newborns.

5.3    Improve maternal, infant and child health by supporting initiatives that foster
       maternal-infant health and early childhood development.

Maternal, infant and child health care is delivered by physicians, midwives and AHS, either through
facilities or through specific programs. These services are publicly funded through either direct
funding to AHS or through the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan. Maternal-infant health initiatives
foster healthy birth outcomes, including healthy birth weights, Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder
prevention, and support for overall maternal and infant health.

The Maternal Newborn Child & Youth Strategic Clinical Network supports various initiatives
including the antenatal care pathway, providing clinicians in rural communities with up-to-date
information, standards of care and decision-making tools. An acute care neonatal abstinence
syndrome pathway, which supports babies of mothers who have been using opioids and other drugs
is nearing completion. The pathway guideline was completed by the end of 2019 and
implementation planning and education resource development has commenced.

The Alberta Newborn Metabolic Screening Program provides timely screening and diagnosis to
improve newborn health and save lives. Following a $2 million investment, the screening panel was
expanded from 17 to 21 conditions and includes screening for treatable conditions such as sickle cell



Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                      53
Results Analysis



disease and cystic fibrosis. In 2018-19 (the most recent information available), the program
successfully screened 99.4 per cent of Alberta-born infants.

Government also committed to increasing access to midwifery services, allowing this important
option to be available to more women. In 2019-20, government, AHS and the Alberta Association of
Midwives reached an agreement to increase the number of courses of care available each year, and
to enable midwives to work to their full capacity of up to 40 courses of care annually. AHS has
integrated midwifery services in all five of Alberta’s health zones and continues to work with the
Alberta Association of Midwives to align midwifery services to the needs and priorities of Albertans
and maternity health service delivery, including in rural communities.

Access to maternity services for Indigenous, vulnerable, and rural populations remains a priority
area for AHS provincially. Government increased funding to support vulnerable mothers and their
babies to access prenatal and postnatal care and social supports. Programs operate in Medicine Hat,
Grande Prairie, Edmonton, Calgary and Red Deer. In July 2019, a mobile health van started
delivering health services and supports to rural and remote areas.

AHS’ Merck for Mothers initiative is community-based programming to enhance the supports
available to pregnant Indigenous women to overcome barriers to prenatal care. For example, in the
Central Zone, Maskwacis focuses on culturally appropriate education programs for pregnant women
and health care providers; the Pregnancy Pathways program in inner city Edmonton provides safe
housing for pregnant Indigenous homeless women and support services, such as opportunities to
attend traditional women’s teachings; and, in the North Zone, Little Red River Cree Nation
community relationships are strengthened through teepee teachings and community home visits.

Performance Metrics

Performance Measure 5.a
     Percentage of seniors aged 65 or older and long-term care facility residents immunized
     for influenza

                                                 Prior Years’ Results                              2019-20         2019-20
 Population
                                2015-16         2016-17          2017-18          2018-19           Target          Actual

 Seniors aged 65
                                 63%              62%               60%             61%              66%              61%
 or older
  Residents of long-
                                 90%              89%               89%             87%              93%              88%
  term care facilities
 Source: Alberta Health Services; Alberta Health’s weekly pharmacists data; First Nations and Inuit Health Branch, Indigenous
 Services Canada, Alberta Region.

This performance measure tracks efforts to reach immunization targets for Albertans in high-risk
groups, specifically seniors (aged 65 or over) and residents of long-term care facilities. Influenza
immunization targets are set by the ministry and are based on national immunization targets as set
by the National Immunization Strategy and agreed to by the Pan-Canadian Public Health Network
Council. National targets are based on epidemiological evidence to decrease disease incidence and
complications from disease.




54                                                                                            Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                            Results Analysis



Results Analysis

In 2019-20, 61 per cent of Alberta’s seniors received immunization against influenza, which is the
same percentage as in 2018-19 and is five per cent below the target (66%). In 2019-20, 88 per cent
of residents in long-term care facilities received immunization, which is one percentage point above
the 2018-19 result (87%) and is five per cent below the target (93%) for these Albertans.

Influenza has a significant impact on the health of Albertans and tends to be most severe among
older Albertans, residents of long-term care facilities, infants, young children, and those with certain
chronic medical conditions. More than 1.4 million doses of influenza vaccine were administered
during the 2019-20 influenza season, covering 33 per cent of Alberta’s population. This is the highest
population-based influenza immunization rate achieved to date since the universal influenza
program was established in 2009.

The 2020-21 Influenza Immunization Policy (IIP) has an added objective of increasing influenza
immunization coverage rates for targeted populations, including individuals 65 years of age and
older. Influenza immunization service delivery is shifting to prioritize high-risk populations, which is
now defined in the 2020-21 IIP. Access to influenza vaccine continues to increase with over 1,400
pharmacies now offering provincially funded vaccine.

In order to better protect residents of long-term care, in 2020-21 the federal government is
procuring an influenza high-dose vaccine for use in all long-term care facilities across Canada that
should offer better protection for the most vulnerable Albertans.

The ministry is working with health practitioners in all health zones to ensure a consistent approach
to reporting influenza immunization and adverse events following immunization to the Provincial
Immunization Repository (Imm/ARI) as per the new reporting requirements outlined in Alberta’s
Immunization Regulation.

Performance Measure 5.b
     Children by age two immunized for DTaP-IPV-Hib (diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis
     (whooping cough), polio, Haemophilus influenza type b) and for MMRV (measles,
     mumps, rubella, varicella)

                                                Prior Years’ Results
                                                                                                2019-20           2019
 Immunization
                                   2015           2016            2017            2018           Target          Actual

 Diphtheria, tetanus,
                                   76%            77%             77%              78%            95%1             79%
 pertussis, polio, Hib

 Measles, mumps,
                                   88%             88%             88%             87%            95%1             88%
 rubella, varicella
 Source: Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan (AHCIP) Quarterly Population Registries; Immunization/Adverse Reactions to
 Immunization (Imm/ARI); Alberta Vital Statistics, Birth Files.
 1
  National targets.

This indicator reports the percentage of children in Alberta who by two years of age have received
the required immunization for the following vaccine preventable diseases: diphtheria, tetanus,
pertussis (whooping cough), polio, Haemophilus influenza type b, measles, mumps, rubella and
varicella.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                          55
Results Analysis



Results Analysis

This performance indicator shows efforts towards protecting children from a number of vaccine
preventable diseases, some of which can be fatal or produce permanent disabilities. A high rate of
immunization reduces the incidence of these diseases and serves to control outbreaks.

In 2019, by age two, 79 per cent of Albertans had received immunization with DTaP-IPV-Hib vaccine
and 88 percent had received immunization with MMRV vaccine. These immunization rates are both
lower than the national target of 95 per cent for both vaccines.

Provincial immunization rates for both vaccines for this age group of children have remained stable
over the past five years. Vaccine hesitancy can contribute to lower rates of immunization and is
related to a general lack of understanding about vaccines, perceived risk of serious adverse events
related to injections, and lack of appreciation for the severity of vaccine preventable diseases.
Accessing vaccine services can also be a barrier.

AHS has implemented five of the seven recommendations of the Canadian Pediatric Society to
increase immunization levels, including the development of a provincial immunization registry,
proactive reminders for parents, enhanced immunization clinic hours, and an augmented school-
based immunization program.

The ministry is working with health practitioners in all health zones to ensure a consistent approach
to disease outbreak reporting, notification, and management.

Performance Indicator 5.c
     Infant mortality rate per 1,000 live births for First Nations people, compared to
     non-First Nations

                                                        Prior Years’ Results                                          2019
     Infant Population1
                                          2015          2016                 2017               2018                 Actual

     First Nations                         8.3            7.8                 9.2                13.8                 9.1
     Non-First Nations                     4.2            3.7                 4.4                 4.4                 3.8
 Sources: Alberta Vital Statistics Death File (infant deaths); Newborn Metabolic Screening Database (live births);
 First Nations Status Registry.
 1
     Infants less than one year of age.

This indicator compares the infant mortality rate for the First Nations population to that of the
non-First Nations population in Alberta. The infant mortality rate provides the rate of death of
children less than one year of age, per 1,000 live births. Infant mortality is often used as an indicator
to measure the health status of a general population, because factors affecting the health of entire
populations can also impact the mortality rate of infants.

Results Analysis

There is a significant gap in the infant mortality rate for the First Nations population in Alberta in
comparison to the non-First Nations population. Infant mortality rates are based on relatively small
numbers that result in annual fluctuations, making trends over time difficult to interpret. Compared
to 2018, the infant mortality rate for First Nations people is lower in 2019; however, it remains
higher compared to 2015 and 2016, while the rate for non-First Nations people has remained
relatively consistent.


56                                                                                              Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                       Results Analysis



Rates of death among infants under one year of age are associated with premature birth, lower birth
weight, and injury. These outcomes may be impacted by maternal health, and may be driven by
socio-environmental factors such as income, housing, education, and employment conditions.
Importantly, for First Nations people, infant mortality rates may be influenced by a complex history
that includes intergenerational trauma from residential schools, higher rates of poverty, and
systemic racism.

To address the health status gaps between First Nations and non-First Nations populations in
Alberta, the ministry is committed to respectfully engaging with Indigenous leadership,
communities, and peoples in the design, delivery and stewardship of health services. Engagement
and coordination processes with Provincial Indigenous Organizations including the Métis Nation of
Alberta, Metis Settlements General Council, Confederacy of Treaty 6, Treaty 8 First Nations of
Alberta, Blackfoot Confederacy and the Stoney Nakoda Tsuut’ina Tribal Council build upon the
foundation of reconciliation and relationships.

The ministry continues to work in partnership with Indigenous people and federal and provincial
partners to strengthen health services for Indigenous people in our province, and is supporting key
initiatives aimed at reducing disparities between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Albertans,
including supporting expectant Indigenous mothers.

Performance Indicator 5.d
     Percentage of Albertans who smoke cigarettes

                                     Prior Years’ Results                              2019-20
                                                                                        Actual
       2015-16                 2016-17               2017-18      2018-19

        16.4%                      16.6%             15.3%         15.5%               15.0%
                                                                                    (preliminary)
 Source: Alberta Community Health Survey

This indicator tracks the percentage of Albertans aged 18 or older who took part in the Alberta
Community Health Survey and indicated that they smoke cigarettes daily or occasionally at the
present time.
Results Analysis
The preliminary survey results for 2019-20 show that 15 per cent of Albertans aged 18 or older
currently smoke cigarettes daily or occasionally. This is less than one percentage point drop when
compared to the previous two years. The desired result is to decrease the percentage of Albertans
who smoke cigarettes daily or occasionally.
The government recognizes the health harms of cigarette smoking and tobacco products. In addition,
the increase in vaping, particularly by youth, is a significant emerging health concern. The review of
Alberta’s Tobacco and Smoking Reduction Act, which commenced in 2019, provided government
with an opportunity to assess the effectiveness of the current legislative framework and consider
options to further protect Albertans.
Public education remains an important tool to discourage the use of tobacco and vaping products. A
variety of information, tips, tools and resources are available through the AlbertaQuits website
(www.albertaquits.ca) to raise awareness about smoking and vaping, and to support a decrease in
the percentage of Albertans who smoke cigarettes daily or occasionally. These supports are
particularly important during the pandemic because infected individuals who smoke or vape are at
higher risk of developing more severe COVID-19 symptoms.


Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                     57
Results Analysis




Performance Measure and Indicator Methodology
Performance Indicator 1.a:
      Unplanned medical readmissions to hospital within 30 days of discharge

 Methodology

 Numerator: Total number of medical patients with unplanned readmission to hospital within 30 days of
 discharge.

         Inclusion Criteria: Residents of Alberta covered by the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan.
          Admission day of subsequent readmission is less than or equal to 30 days of initial discharge
          date from an acute care hospital.
      Exclusion Criteria: Transfers (admitted within 6 hours of discharge from another hospital, or 6-
       12 hours after transfer from or to an acute care facility); newborn, still birth, cadaver admissions;
       non-acute care admissions; pediatric (less than 20 years of age), surgery, obstetrics, palliative
       care, mental health admissions; hospital admissions for cancer therapy; non-urgent, planned
       admissions.
 Denominator: Total number of medical patients discharged.

         Inclusion Criteria: Residents of Alberta covered by the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan;
          discharge from an acute care hospital, within a reporting period.

         Exclusion Criteria: Admissions where patients died in hospital; admissions from March 2 to
          March 31; transfers (admitted within 6 hours of discharge from another hospital, or 6-12 hours
          after transfer from or to an acute care facility); newborn, still birth, cadaver admissions; non-
          acute care admissions; pediatric (less than 20 years of age), surgery, obstetrics, palliative care,
          mental health admission.

                                        Number of discharged patients readmitted to hospital
 Hospital Readmission                           within 30 days of index discharge
                                                                                                  X 100
 Percentage (unadjusted) =
                                                   Number of patients discharged

 Risk Adjustment: Accounts for differences in patient characteristics that may vary over years. Based on
 the list of risk factors (e.g. age, sex, case mixing grouping, Charlson comorbidity score) published by the
 Canadian Institute for Health Information, Alberta built provincial specific logistic regression model using
 past five-year data to estimate the Alberta average and expected readmissions based on patients’ risk
 profile.
 The risk-adjusted rate is calculated using the following formula:

                                                   observed cases
            Risk-adjusted rate =                                               X Alberta rate
                                                   expected cases

 Source

 Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI); Alberta Health Discharge Abstract Database (DAD);
 Hospital Morbidity Database (HMDB); National Ambulatory Care Reporting System (NACRS).




58                                                                              Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                               Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 1.b
     Median number of days hospital stay extended until home care services or supports
     were ready

  Methodology

  The indicator measures the median (50th percentile) number of days patients spend in an inpatient
  acute care hospital bed when they don’t need acute care, also known as alternate level of care (ALC),
  before they are discharged to home care.

           Inclusion Criteria: Records from acute care hospitals in Alberta; patients discharged to home or
            a home setting with home care services available to the patient; sex recorded as male or
            female; and, records with a valid ALC length of stay greater than 0.
           Exclusion Criteria: Records with admission category of cadaveric donor or stillbirth.

                            The mid-point on the distribution curve of the # days spent in hospital in ALC
     Median # days =
                            before discharged with home care available.
  Source
  Alberta Health Discharge Abstract Database (DAD).




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                             59
Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 1.c
     Ambulatory Care Sensitive Condition hospitalization rate

 Methodology
 Numerator: Total number of acute care hospitalizations for patients under 75 years of age for
 ambulatory care sensitive conditions (ACSCs).

         Inclusion Criteria: Any most responsible diagnosis code relating to grand mal status and other
          epileptic convulsions; chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases (COPD); acute lower respiratory
          infection, only when there is a secondary diagnosis of J44; asthma; heart failure and pulmonary
          edema; hypertension; angina; and, diabetes; and, gender specified as male or female.
          Age is determined as of discharge date. Only people deemed as “Alberta resident” (as defined
          by the Ministry of Health) will be included. This includes people that are homeless and people
          from Lloydminster, discharged from an acute care hospital.

         Exclusion Criteria: Individuals 75 years of age or older; deaths; stillbirths and newborns; cases
          with a specified cardiac procedure; and, records where the fiscal year was omitted.

 Denominator: The total end-of-fiscal year population younger than age 75. The population is age-
 adjusted using the 2011 Canada Census.
 The overall age-standardized rate is obtained by first calculating crude rates for each age group
 multiplied by its corresponding age groups weight (derived from the 2011 Canadian Census). The sum
 across all age groups for the year is the age-standardized ACSC.
                             total # of acute care hospitalizations for ACSCs under age 75
 Hospitalization rate =                                   years                                  X 100,000
                                 total end-of-fiscal year population under age 75 years
 Source
 Numerator: Alberta Health Discharge Abstract Database (DAD); Denominator: Alberta Health
 population estimate.




60                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                              Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 1.d
     Wait times for surgical procedures

 Methodology
 Ready-to-treat (RTT) Wait time (in days) is calculated for each relevant record meeting specified
 inclusion/exclusion criteria.

         Inclusion Criteria: All elective hip, knee replacement and cataract surgeries based on surgery
          procedure catalogue descriptions. All urgency levels.
         Exclusion Criteria: Persons who received emergency surgical care. Cases with an invalid RTT
          date. When cataract surgery is required for a patient’s both eyes, only the wait time for surgery
          on the first eye is included in the wait time calculations.

 RTT Date = The date that the surgeon determines the patient is ready for the surgical intervention.
            The RTT Date excludes patient delays or voluntary waits.

 Treatment Date = The date the treatment (surgical procedure) took place.

 RTT Wait time = Treatment (surgical procedure) Date minus RTT Date

          National RTT wait time benchmarks:
          - Hip replacement national benchmark is 182 days
          - Knee replacement national benchmark is 182 days
          - Cataract surgery national benchmark (for first eye) is 112 days.

                            # of cases completed with a RTT wait time less than or equal to the
     Percentage =                          national RTT wait time benchmark                        X 100
                                        # of completed cases with valid RTT dates
 Source
 Alberta Health Services. Multiple Operating Room Systems across Alberta (PICIS, Meditech, VAX, and
 Manual Data Collection).




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                              61
Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 1.e
     Percentage of scheduled surgeries performed in chartered surgical facilities (formerly
     known as non-hospital surgical facilities)

 Methodology
 Numerator: Non-emergency Main Operating Room cases completed in chartered surgical facilities
 (CSFs).

 Denominator: Non-emergency Main Operating Room cases completed in CSFs and hospitals .

 Emergency surgeries and pregnancy terminations are excluded from the calculation.

                               # surgeries performed in CSFs under contract with AHS
 Percentage =                                                                                     X 100
                            total # surgeries in CSFs and hospitals from April 1 to Mar 31
 Source
 Alberta Health Services Discharge Abstract Database (DAD); National Ambulatory Care Reporting
 System (NACRS).


Performance Indicator 2.a
     Provincial per capita spending on health care

 Methodology
 Health expenditure includes any type of expenditure for which the primary objective is to improve or
 prevent the deterioration of health status.

 Data is extracted annually from provincial and territorial government public accounts. Programs and/or
 program items are classified into health expenditure categories according to accepted and standardized
 methods and definitions used in estimating national health expenditure. Data from the public accounts
 is supplemented with information from provincial and territorial government department annual reports
 and annual statistical reports when available, as well as information provided by provincial and territorial
 government department officials.

 Adjustments for regional health authority and/or hospital deficits or surpluses are not made in the
 National Health Expenditures Trends (NHEX) report unless the provincial government assumes them. If
 deficits or surpluses are assumed by the provincial government, they are allocated to the years when
 the regional health authority and/or hospitals accumulated them.

 As part of the preparation of the NHEX report, the Canadian Institute for Health Information estimates of
 provincial and territorial government health expenditures were submitted to provincial and territorial
 departments of health for review.


                                                                provincial government health expenditure
 Per capita provincial government health expenditure =
                                                                           population estimates
 Source
 Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI), National Health Expenditures Trends (NHEX), 1975 to
 2019. Statistics Canada, Demography Division (population estimates).




62                                                                              Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                             Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 2.b
     Cost of standard hospital stay

 Methodology
 The Cost of standard hospital stay (CSHS) is constructed as a ratio. CSHS is comparable across
 provinces since data for the Canadian MIS Database (CMDB) and Discharge Abstract Database (DAD)
 are submitted by provinces according to national standards.

 Numerator: Total inpatient costs captured from all areas of a hospital. As a full-cost indicator, the CSHS
 includes not only direct expenses incurred in the provision of care (e.g., nursing compensation, drugs,
 meals, etc) but also the indirect operational expenses (e.g., finance, administrative services). The costs
 are retrieved from the CMDB, which contains financial and statistical operations information from
 hospitals and regional health authorities across Canada.

 Note: The CSHS calculation excludes physician compensation. Physician compensation within the
 hospital environment is treated and reported differently across jurisdictions due to varying provincial and
 territorial policies. It has been removed from the CSHS calculation for better comparability across
 jurisdictions.

 Denominator: The sum of all acute care weighted cases, or Resource Intensity Weights (RIWs). To
 arrive at this number, each inpatient case is weighted by an RIW factor indicating the expected
 resource intensity of the stay. All RIWs are relative to the average typical inpatient case, which is
 assigned an RIW of 1.0. For example, a patient with an RIW of 2.0 would be expected to require twice
 as many resources during his or her hospital stay as the average typical inpatient. The RIW calculated
 for each stay takes into account a patient’s age, disease status, comorbidities, and types of
 interventions received. Data required for the denominator is retrieved from the DAD, which captures
 administrative, clinical and demographic information about patients when they are discharged from the
 hospital.

                                                       Total inpatient costs
    Cost of a standard hospital stay =
                                            Total acute inpatient weighted cases
 Source
 Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI): Canadian MIS Database (CMDB) and Alberta Health
 Discharge Abstract Database (DAD).




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                          63
Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 2.c
     Alternate level of care days

 Methodology
 Alternative Level of Care (ALC) days are recorded at any point during the hospital stay for patients
 covered by the publicly funded Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan.

         Inclusion Criteria: Records from acute care hospitals in Alberta; sex recorded as male or
          female; and, records with a valid ALC length of stay greater than 0.

         Exclusion Criteria: Records with admission category of cadaveric donor or stillbirth.


                            # of days as an inpatient in hospital classified as ALC days
     Percentage =                                                                             X 100
                                        total # of inpatient days in hospital.
 Source

 Alberta Health Discharge Abstract Database (DAD).


Performance Indicator 2.d
     Facility-based beds in community settings

 Methodology
 Facility-based beds in the community as a proportion of all beds.

 Numerator: Number of facility-based beds in a community setting.

    Inclusion Criteria:
     - Long-Term Care (Auxiliary and Nursing Home)
     - Designated Supportive Living (DSL3, DSL4, DSL4D)
     - Community Palliative and Hospice (outside hospitals)
     - Sub-Acute in Long-Term Care (Auxiliary Hospitals)
     - Addiction and Mental Health (Addiction Treatment, Community Mental Health, stand-alone
          psychiatric facilities)

 Denominator: Number of facility-based beds in a community setting and number of beds in acute care
 hospitals.

                                     # facility-based beds in a community setting
     Percentage =                                                                                 X 100
                          # facility-based beds in a community setting + # acute care beds
 Source
 Alberta Health Services.




64                                                                               Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                           Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 2.e
     Annual rate of operational expenditures

 Methodology
 Calculation of percentage growth in ministry operational expenses when compared to operational
 expenses in the previous fiscal year.

 Operational expenses is defined as the Ministry of Health total expenses per published Statement of
 Revenue and Expenses less infrastructure support.

                       total 2019/20 operational expenses – total 2018/19 operational expenses
 Percentage =                                                                                    X 100
                                            total 2018/19 operational expenses

 Source

 Ministry Consolidated Statement of Revenue and Expenses as presented in the Financial Information
 section of the Ministry of Health Annual Report.



Performance Indicator 3.a
     Percentage of Alternative Relationship Plan payments of total physician payments

 Methodology
 Alternative Relationship Plans (ARPs) are arrangements to compensate physicians by methods other
 than fee-for-service. Information comes from the Canadian Institute for Health Information – National
 Physician Database (NPDB). NPDB data is derived from physicians’ billings, including fee codes, which
 provincial and territorial medicare programs submit.

 Claims data and associated physician data are submitted quarterly, usually within six months of the end
 of the fiscal quarter. The ARP payment data is derived from payments made to ARP programs through
 the Claims Assessment System in the specified fiscal year.

                                   $ physician payments made under an ARP
       Percentage =                                                              X 100
                                            $ physician payments
 Source
 Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) - National Physician Database (NPDB); Alternative
 Payment Information File for Alberta.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                         65
Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 3.b
     Percentage of Albertans who had access to a regular health care provider

 Methodology
 Statistics Canada’s Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS) is a cross-sectional survey that
 collects information related to health status, health care utilization, and health determinants for the
 Canadian Population (including regional and provincial levels).

          Inclusion Criteria: Population age 12 and older.
          Exclusion Criteria: Persons living on Indigenous reserves or settlements, full-time members of
           the Canadian Forces, institutionalized population (i.e., those who live in an institutional collective
           dwelling, such as a hospital, a nursing home or a prison; residents under care or custody, such
           as patients or inmates), and children age 12-17 living in foster care.

 Population estimates are based on weighted survey responses to reflect the total population. The
 results of the survey are based on a 95% confidence interval.

                        # survey respondents who reported having a regular health care provider
 Percentage =                                                                                             X 100
                                                  # survey respondents
 Source
 Canadian Community Health Survey, Statistics Canada.


Performance Indicator 3.c
     Percentage of Licensed Practical Nurses relative to Registered Nurses

 Methodology
 Prior to 2019, data pertaining to registered nurses (RNs) reported by the Canadian Institute for Health
 Information (CIHI) included Nurse Practitioners (NPs). In the ‘Nursing in Canada, 2019 data tables’, CIHI
 separated NP counts from RN counts. In calculation of the percentage of licensed practical nurses
 (LPNs) relative to RNs, the current methodology excludes NPs.

 Nurse supply refers to those nurses who are eligible to practice in the given year, including those
 employed and those not employed at the time of registration. Note that secondary registrants (also
 known as interprovincial duplicates) are excluded from provincial nurse supply counts.

                                                   # LPN supply
         Percentage =                                                                       X 100
                               # RN supply + # registered psychiatric nurse supply
 Source
 Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI).




66                                                                                  Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                             Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 3.d
     Percentage of Nurse Practitioners relative to Family Medicine Physicians

 Methodology
 Numerator: Nurse Practitioner (NP) supply refers to all NPs who are eligible to practice in the given
 year, including those employed and those not employed at the time of registration. Note that secondary
 registrants (also known as interprovincial duplicates) are excluded from provincial NP supply counts.

 Denominator: Family medicine physicians include general practitioners, as well as family medicine
 specialists and emergency family medicine specialists who are certificants of the College of Family
 Physicians of Canada.

                                       # nurse practitioner supply
      Percentage =                                                           X 100
                                      # family medicine physicans
 Source
 Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI).


Performance Indicator 3.e
     Average wait time from general practitioner to orthopedic surgeon consult

 Methodology
 Referrals and surgeon consult records are transmitted from participating surgeon office electronic
 medical record system to Alberta Bone and Joint Health Institute monthly.
                               Number of weeks from the day a surgeon’s office receives the referral
 Average wait time =              to the patient’s first appointment with the orthopedic surgeon
                                   Number of first appointments completed by orthopedic surgeons
 Source

 Alberta Bone and Joint Health Institute.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                          67
Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 4.a
     Unplanned mental health readmissions to hospital

 Methodology
 The patient population is aged 15 years or older.
 The unit of analysis is an inpatient encounter within a single acute inpatient facility. Discharges to
 transfer between acute inpatient facilities are excluded, although the discharge from the final facility
 after transfers is included. In this way, episodes of care are identified with the reporting facility identified
 as the final discharging facility.
 Readmission rate reporting always lags by a fiscal year quarter. Information is available once data from
 the Discharge Abstract Database (DAD) is collected by all facilities in the province and loaded into the
 provincial database. Enforced reporting lag is applied (90 days) to allow for completion of stay and load
 of the abstract record for the readmission stay.
 Readmission rates are attributed to the fiscal year and quarter in which a patient is originally discharged
 from an acute care hospital. This requires that patients be tracked for 30 days after the end of the
 quarter to allow sufficient time from the date of initial discharge to determine whether a readmission will
 occur.
 Since transfer is excluded from readmission and there are several non-standardized ways to determine
 whether a transfer has occurred, the readmission rates published elsewhere could differ. Since there is
 not a standard method to identify unplanned readmissions (e.g., admissions through emergency
 ambulatory care), readmission rates published elsewhere may differ. Unplanned admission is defined
 as admit category ‘U’ which is urgent or emergent admission. The data reliability is highly dependent on
 the accuracy of this field.
 Crude Readmission Rate (CRR):


                   # discharged patients readmitted within 30 days of index discharge
     CRR =                                                                                      X 100
                    # index hospital discharges with MRDx as selected mental illness


 Risk Adjusted Rate (RAR):

 The observed number of cases is the actual count of readmissions to a hospital. The expected number
 of cases is based on the sum of the probabilities of readmissions to a hospital. Coefficients from the
 Canadian Institute for Health Information used for calculating the probability of readmissions were from
 logistic regression models on the following independent variables – age, sex, multiple previous
 admissions for a selected mental illness (two or more) during the past 12 months, discharges against
 medical advice, substance abuse related disorder, schizophrenia, anxiety disorder, and personality
 disorder.

                                            # of observed cases
             RAR =                                                                  X the Canadian CRR
                                            # of expected cases
 Source
 Alberta Health Discharge Abstract Database (DAD).




68                                                                                 Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                               Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 4.b
     Emergency department visits where a mental health issue was identified for the first
     time in the past two years.

 Methodology
 This indicator examines first-contact visits to an emergency department (ED) for mental health
 conditions. The calculation includes the number of mental health related ED visits (per 100 mental
 health ED visits) for those patients, aged 15 or older, where the patient had received no mental health
 services from a physician, or in a hospital or emergency department in the preceding two years.
 Data is sourced from ministry databases pertaining to physician billing claims data and hospital
 discharge abstracts, and the National Ambulatory Care Reporting System. Current fiscal year results
 are reported as preliminary to allow for all provincial reporting to be completed.
                                   # individuals treated in an ED for a mental health reason
 # visits (per 100                                for the first time in two years                 X 100
 mental health ED visits) =
                                   # individuals treated in an ED for a mental health reason

 Source
 Alberta Health Discharge Abstract Database (DAD), Alberta Ambulatory Care Reporting System
 (AACRS), Alberta physician claims database, Provincial Population Registry.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                            69
Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 4.c
     Emergency department visits due to alcohol use

 Methodology
 This indicator provides the age-standardized rate of visits to emergency departments and urgent care
 centres related to use of alcohol.
 Emergency visits are any hospital discharges beginning with any of the following MIS codes: 71310
 (Ambulatory Care Services described as emergency), 71513 (Community Urgent Care Centre), and
 71514 (Community Advanced Ambulatory Care Centre). A discharge or emergency visit occurs when a
 patient leaves the hospital – by death, transfer to another facility, discharge to home, or against medical
 advice.
 Only Alberta residents are included in the numerator. Emergency visit rates based on all diagnostic
 fields were used. The following ICD10 codes were selected: F10 (mental and behavioral disorders due
 to use of alcohol) and T51 (toxic effects due to alcohol).
 The date of birth in the fiscal year population registry file is used to calculate the age of the individual as
 of March 31 each year.
 The population excludes members of the Canadian Armed Forces, RCMP, inmates in federal
 penitentiaries, and those who have opted out of the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan.

 Age-standardized rate of visits:

                   last age group    # ED visits (alcohol) in age group       reference pop’n in age group
                            Σ                                             X                                   X 100,000
     Rate =          i = first age   Alberta pop’n in that age group          total reference population
                        group


 Source
 Alberta Ambulatory Care database; Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan, End-of-fiscal year (March 31) adjusted
 Population Registry Files Statistics Canada; Canadian population, 2011.




70                                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 5.a
     Percentage seniors aged 65 or older and long-term care facility residents
     immunized for influenza.

 Methodology
 Seniors aged 65 or over:
                          # of seniors aged 65 or over who received one dose of the influenza
   Immunization                                         vaccine                                    X 100
      rate =
                                     mid-year population estimate of age category

 Residents of long-term care (LTC) facilities:
                          # of LTC residents on Dec 15, 2019 who received one vaccine dose
   Immunization                   during the period October 1 – December 15, 2019                  X 100
      rate =
                                         # of LTC residents on Dec 15, 2019
 It is necessary to define the number of residents of long-term care facilities on December 15 each year,
 due to the high turnover in this population. Otherwise, the result would be an immunization rate over
 100 per cent.
 Source
 Numerator: Number of individuals immunized by age category: Alberta Health Services zones; Alberta
 Health’s weekly pharmacists data; First Nations and Inuit Health Branch, Indigenous Services Canada,
 Alberta Region.
 Denominator: For seniors, the denominator is the ministry’s population estimates, based on mid-year
 registration population estimates. For residents of long-term care facilities the denominator is the
 number of residents as of December 15, 2019 provided by Alberta Health Services.


Performance Indicator 5.b
     Children by age two immunized for DTaP-IPV-Hib (diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis
     (whooping cough), polio, Haemophilus influenza type b), and for MMRV (measles,
     mumps, rubella, varicella)

 Methodology
 Using data from the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan population registries, children in Alberta are
 followed through time (i.e., from date of birth to study end date). Exclusions include individuals leaving
 Alberta, individuals who died, individuals who do not belong to the study period, First Nations
 individuals, and residents of Lloydminster.
 Coverage rates are based on a birth cohort and reported at age two. Once established the population-
 based birth cohort is linked to Imm/ARI using the Unique Lifetime Identifier to get immunization
 information.
 Calculation: Childhood immunization coverage is calculated using a survival analysis (time-to-
 immunization) method based on the specified population-based birth cohort. The analysis measures the
 probability that the child will receive required vaccines by age two.
 Source
 Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan (AHCIP) Quarterly Population Registries; Immunization/Adverse
 Reactions to Immunization (Imm/ARI), Alberta Vital Statistics, Birth Files.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                              71
Results Analysis



Performance Indicator 5.c
     Infant mortality rate per 1000 live births for First Nations people, compared to
     non-First Nations

 Methodology
 Infant deaths are identified from the Alberta Vital Statistics Death file, while live births are identified from
 the Newborn Metabolic Screening Database. Infants are defined as less than one year of age (birth to
 364 days).
                                         # of infant deaths during a calendar year
       Infant mortality rate =                                                                X 1,000
                                           # of live births during a calendar year
 Source
 Alberta Vital Statistics Death File (infant deaths); Newborn Metabolic Screening Database (live births);
 First Nations Status Registry.


Performance Indicator 5.d
     Percentage of Albertans who smoke cigarettes

 Methodology
 The Alberta Community Health Survey is a telephone based survey aimed to collect data on specific
 determinants of health among Albertans 18 years and older.

 The smoking indicator is based on the following survey question: “At the present time, do you smoke
 cigarettes: i) Daily, ii) Occasionally, or iii) not at all”?

 Sampling Methodology:
 Goal of sampling frame is to have high-quality geographically representative estimates
     Telephone (cell phone and landed line) or web based survey among Albertans 18 years and
         older
     Cell phone sampling with geographic specificity began halfway through the 2014 cycle
     A web-based survey (Jan 2017 onwards) was available to those who did not elect to do the
         telephone survey
     Sample size in 2015-2016 to 2019-20 was 7152, 6410, 6474, 6716 and 3191 (preliminary),
         respectively.

 The percentage of cigarette smokers is estimated by tabulating a weighted proportion of those that
 responded as daily or occasional cigarette smokers and based on a confidence interval of 95%.

 Geographic assignment is based on the postal code of residence reported by the respondent.
 The geographic areas are obtained by linking the postal code with the Postal Code Translator File.
                             weighted total of daily or occasional cigarette smokers
     Smoking rate =                                                                           X 100
                                           weighted total (all responses)
 Source
 Alberta Community Health Survey (ACHS).




72                                                                                   Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                                                              Financial Information




Financial Information
Table of Contents
    Reporting Entity and Method Consolidation...................................................................................... 74
    Ministry Financial Highlights.................................................................................................................... 75
          Statement of Revenues and Expenses (unaudited) ................................................................. 75
          Revenue and Expense Highlights .................................................................................................... 76
          Expenses – Directly Incurred Detailed by Object (unaudited) ........................................... 79
    Supplemental Financial Information ..................................................................................................... 81
          Tangible Capital Assets (unaudited).............................................................................................. 81
          Portfolio Investments (unaudited)................................................................................................. 82
    Financial Statements of Other Reporting Entities ........................................................................... 83
          Alberta Health Services ....................................................................................................................... 85
          Health Quality Council of Alberta..................................................................................................139
    Other Financial Information ...................................................................................................................159
          Department of Health ........................................................................................................................160
          Ministry of Health ................................................................................................................................166




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                                                                   73
Financial Information




Reporting Entity and Method Consolidation
The consolidated ministry financial information is prepared in accordance with Canadian Public
Sector Accounting Standards.

The reporting entity is the Ministry of Health, for which the Minister of Health is accountable. The
accounts of the Department of Health are fully consolidated with Alberta Health Services (AHS) and
Health Quality Council of Alberta on a line-by-line basis.

Accounts of entities that are consolidated by AHS are listed in note 2a (i) and (ii) of AHS
consolidated financial statements.

Under the line-by-line basis, accounting policies of the consolidated entities are adjusted to
conform to government accounting policies and the results of each line item in their financial
statements (revenue, expense, assets, and liabilities) are included in government’s results. Revenue
and expense, capital, investing and financing transactions and related asset and liability balances
between the consolidated entities have been eliminated.




74                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                         Financial Information



Ministry of Health

Ministry Financial Highlights
Statement of Revenues and Expenses (unaudited)
Year ended March 31, 2020
(in thousands)



                                                                   2020                    2019              Change from
                                                          Budget          Actual           Actual        Budget     2019 Actual
  Revenues                                                                               (Restated)
   Government Transfers
     Government of Alberta                            $      417,000 $       425,845 $       420,622 $      8,845 $       5,223
     Government of Canada                                  4,840,370       4,815,833       4,569,848      (24,537)      245,985
   Premiums, Fees and Licences                               554,001         572,658         580,542       18,657        (7,884)
   Investment Income                                          65,020          80,269          68,544       15,249        11,725
   Refunds of Expense                                        169,105         222,414         201,826       53,309        20,588
   Other Revenue                                             410,922         472,103         457,080       61,181        15,023
   Ministry Total                                          6,456,418       6,589,122       6,298,462      132,704       290,660
   Inter-Ministry Consolidation Adjustments                 (447,800)       (458,438)       (453,626)     (10,638)       (4,812)
  Adjusted Ministry Total                                  6,008,618       6,130,684       5,844,836      122,066       285,848
  Expenses - Directly Incurred
   Ministry Support Services                                  61,803          61,297          60,349         (506)          948
   Physician Compensation and Development                  5,431,717       5,456,359       5,365,361       24,642        90,998
   Drugs and Supplemental Health Benefits                  2,250,009       2,335,872       2,202,674       85,863       133,198
   Population and Public Health                              690,514         640,212         624,831      (50,302)       15,381
   Acute Care                                              4,051,171       4,150,743       4,138,866       99,572        11,877
   Continuing Care                                         1,145,000       1,163,433       1,126,904       18,433        36,529
   Ambulance Services                                        514,000         527,041         525,530       13,041         1,511
   Community Care                                          1,475,000       1,475,178       1,417,257          178        57,921
   Home Care                                                 688,000         716,023         688,040       28,023        27,983
   Diagnostic, Therapeutic & Other Patient Services        2,451,569       2,493,967       2,475,531       42,398        18,436
   Administration                                            537,533         492,031         542,397      (45,502)      (50,366)
   Support Services                                        2,245,000       2,267,016       2,241,441       22,016        25,575
   Information Technology                                    664,473         660,838         584,459       (3,635)       76,379
   Research and Education                                     97,579         127,253         137,941       29,674       (10,688)
   Debt Servicing                                             16,000          14,755          15,353       (1,245)         (598)
   Infrastructure Support                                     33,026           9,727          44,360      (23,299)      (34,633)
   Cancer Research and Prevention Investment                  12,390           2,449           6,567       (9,941)       (4,118)
   COVID-19 Pandemic Response                                    -            25,837             -         25,837        25,837
   Ministry Total                                         22,364,784      22,620,031      22,197,861      255,247       422,170
   Inter-Ministry Consolidation Adjustments                 (260,108)       (276,146)       (277,663)     (16,038)        1,517
  Adjusted Ministry Total                                 22,104,676      22,343,885      21,920,198      239,209       423,687
  Adjusted Annual Deficit                             $ (16,096,058) $ (16,213,201) $ (16,075,362) $     (117,143) $   (137,839)




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                            75
Financial Information



Ministry of Health

Revenue and Expense Highlights
Revenues
Consolidated Revenues (prior to inter-ministry consolidation adjustments)


                            Refunds of                  Transfers-
                                       Other Revenue
                             Expense                   Government of
                                             7%
                               3%                         Alberta
                                                            7%
        Investment Income
               1%

             Premiums, Fees
              and Licences
                   9%




                                                                  Transfers-
                                                                 Government of
                                                                   Canada
                                                                     73%




Actual revenue was higher than the budget by $133 million mainly due to:
• Refunds of Expense being higher than anticipated for aggregate assessment and refund of
     unutilized grant funding from previous years.
• Other Revenue due to unbudgeted cancer drugs received at no cost from suppliers, and
     more than anticipated recoveries from Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy and external entities.


Actual revenue increased by $291 million over prior year mainly due to:
• Federal Government Transfers due to annualized increase in Canada Health Transfer and
     funding increase for Home and Community Care Services and Mental Health and Addiction
     Services.




76                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                        Financial Information



Ministry of Health
Expenses
Consolidated Expenses (prior to inter-ministry consolidation adjustments)

                              Information              Others*       Ministry Support
                              Technology                0.8%            Services
             Support Services     3%
                                                                           0.3%
                  10%                                                               Physician
                Administration                                                  Compensation and
                      2%                                                          Development
                                                                                      24%
        Diagnostic,
    Therapeutic & Other
     Patient Services
           11%

             Home Care
                3%                                                                           Drugs and
                                                                                         Supplemental Health
                                                                                               Benefits
                                                                                                10%
               Community Care
                                                                                    Population and
                   7%
                                                                                     Public Health
                        Ambulance                                                         3%
                                                             Acute Care
                         Services Continuing Care
                                        5%                      19%
                           2%


  * includes Research and Education, Debt Servicing, Infrastructure Support, Cancer Research and Prevention Investment, and
    COVID-19 Pandemic Response.



Actual expenses was higher than the budget by $255 million mainly due to:
• Drugs and Supplemental Health Benefits as a result of accounting for utilization of
   unbudgeted cancer drugs received at no cost, higher utilization of high cost cancer drugs,
   and increase in senior drug benefits due to volume growth;
• Acute Care due to higher than anticipated demand for services resulting in higher staffing
   levels and costs; and
• Diagnostic, Therapeutic and Other Patient Services due to lower than planned achieved
   savings and increased access for Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and Computed
   Tomography (CT) scans.


The deficit was partially offset by surplus in:
• Population and Public Health due to deferral of spending as part of in-year cost savings
   initiatives and reduced funding resulting from unutilized prior year funds; and
• Administration due to vacancies and discretionary spending reduction strategies resulting in
   reduced expenses.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                              77
Financial Information



Actual expenses increased by $422 million over prior year mainly due to:
• Physician Compensation and Development attributed to volume growth in Fee for Service;
• Drugs and Supplemental Health Benefits due to increased utilization of high cost cancer
     drugs and increased population eligible for drugs, support and health benefits;
• Community Care as a result of full implementation of initiatives related to Continuing Care
     Capacity Plan and Health System Integration that started partway during prior year;
• Information Technology due to development and implementation of Connect Care and
     retirement of obsolete operating systems.


The increase was partially offset by:
• Infrastructure Support due to deferral of spending as part of in-year cost savings initiatives,
     and project delays for continuing care facilities; and
• Administration due to lower costs of liability insurance.




78                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                              Financial Information



Ministry of Health

Expenses – Directly Incurred Detailed by Object (unaudited)
(in thousands)

                                                         2020                      2019

                                                Budget           Actual           Actual
  Grants                                    $    6,662,737   $    6,694,349   $     6,579,024
  Supplies and Services                          5,787,102        5,800,962         5,781,909
  Salaries, Wages and Employee Benefits          8,430,783        8,629,931         8,420,613
  Amortization of Tangible Capital Assets          572,522          557,249           544,239
  Consumption of Inventories of Supplies           893,500          844,955           807,468
  Financial Transactions and Other                  18,140           92,585             64,608
                                            $   22,364,784   $   22,620,031   $    22,197,861




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                 79
Financial Information



Ministry of Health
                                       2020 Actual (unaudited)


                                                      Consumption of
                        Amortization of                Inventories of
                        Tangible Capital                  Supplies
                            Assets                          4%
                              2%

                                                                         Grants
                                                                          30%




           Salaries, Wages
            and Employee
               Benefits
                 38%



                                                                  Supplies and
                                                                    Services
                                                                     26%



• Ministry expenses incurred were primarily for Grants, Supplies and Services, and Salaries,
     Wages and Employee benefits, which accounted for 94% of the total expenses.
• Salaries, Wages, and Employee benefits totaled 38% ($8.6 billion) of the expenses primarily
     for delivery and provision of health services.
• Grants comprised 30% ($6.7 billion) of the expenses primarily for Physician Compensation
     and Development, and Drugs and Supplemental Health Benefits. Other grant expenses
     includes restricted funding to support organization and communities through grant programs,
     and funding for out-of-province health services.
• Supplies and services resulted in 26% ($5.8 billion) of the expenses mainly attributed to
     contracts with voluntary and private health service providers, contract payments to
     physicians for referred-out services, purchased services, and home support contracts.
• Amortization of tangible capital assets ($557 million), consumption of inventories of supplies
     ($845 million), and financial transactions and other expenses ($93 million) comprises the
     residual ministry expenses.




80                                                                           Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                                                                  Financial Information



Ministry of Health

Supplemental Financial Information
Tangible Capital Assets (unaudited)
Year ended March 31, 2020
(in thousands)

                                                                                           2020                                                                2019
                                                                                                    Computer
                                                                      Land                          Hardware
                                                                   Improvement                        and
                                       Land        Buildings (1)        s      Equipment            Software       Leasehold Assets          Total             Total

Estimated Useful Life                Indefinite   10-40 years 5-40 years           3-20 years      3-10 years        Term of Lease


Historical Cost (2)
   Beginning of year                $ 116,823 $ 11,481,121 $ 94,188 $ 2,546,862 $ 2,010,087 $                                 248,124 $ 16,497,205 $ 15,765,156
   Additions (3)                          133      683,383   11,473     103,060     247,072                                    32,231    1,077,352      887,138
   Disposals, including
     write-downs                          (30)         (30,216)           (80)         (46,220)         (53,396)               (1,069)       (131,011)         (155,089)
                                      116,926       12,134,288        105,581        2,603,702        2,203,763               279,286      17,443,546        16,497,205

Accumulated Amortization
   Beginning of year                        -        4,349,705         68,851        1,923,929        1,530,633               192,369        8,065,487        7,673,603
   Amortization expense                     -          305,988          3,280          146,443           93,014                 8,524          557,249          544,239
   Effect of disposals                      -           (2,813)           (80)         (45,228)         (41,914)               (1,067)         (91,102)        (152,355)
                                            -        4,652,880         72,051        2,025,144        1,581,733               199,826        8,531,634        8,065,487

Net Book Value at March 31, 2020 $ 116,926 $ 7,481,408 $ 33,530 $                      578,558 $        622,030 $              79,460 $ 8,911,912
Net Book Value at March 31, 2019 $ 116,823 $ 7,131,416 $ 25,337 $                      622,933 $        479,454 $              55,755             $ 8,431,718

(1)
    Buildings include parking lots.
(2)
    Historical cost includes work-in-progress at March 31, 2020 totaling $1,770,125 (2019 - $1,633,567).
(3) Additions include total contributed capital assets of $523,196 (2019 - $285,368) consisting of $523,196 from Ministry of Infrastructure (2019 - $285,322) and $nil

    from other sources (2019 - $46).




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                                                                           81
Financial Information



Ministry of Health

Portfolio Investments (unaudited)
Year ended March 31, 2020
(in thousands)


                                                           2020                                 2019
                                                Book Value      Fair Value           Book Value      Fair Value
 Cash held for investing purposes             $      112,072 $       112,072       $      110,887 $       110,887
 Interest bearing securities:
        Money market securities                       38,076          38,076              177,199           177,199
        Fixed income securities                      888,059         902,690            1,467,856         1,485,637
                                                     926,135         940,766            1,645,055         1,662,836
 Equities:
        Canadian equities                            121,175         111,491              157,852           175,391
        Global equities                              256,183         278,175              288,454           329,954
                                                     377,358         389,666              446,306           505,345
 Real estate pooled funds                              40,267         40,837                    -                 -
 Total Portfolio Investments                  $     1,455,832 $    1,483,341       $    2,202,248 $       2,279,068


     The following is a breakdown of portfolio investments:

                                                          2020                                2019
                                                  Cost        Fair Value               Cost        Fair Value
 Operating                                   $    1,380,394 $    1,407,903     $       2,127,091 $    2,203,911
 Endowments                                          75,438         75,438                75,157         75,157
 Total Portfolio Investments                 $    1,455,832 $    1,483,341     $       2,202,248 $    2,279,068




82                                                                                 Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                                                         Financial Information




Financial Statements of Other Reporting Entities


Table of Contents
Index of Audited Financial Statements
         Alberta Health Services ...................................................................................................................... 85
         Health Quality Council of Alberta..................................................................................................139




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                                                             83
Financial Information




84                      Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                                                  Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Financial Statements
Table of Contents

         Management Responsibility for Financial Reporting ............................................................. 86

         Independent Auditor’s Report ......................................................................................................... 87

         Consolidated Statement of Operations ......................................................................................... 89

         Consolidated Statement of Financial Position ........................................................................... 90

         Consolidated Statement of Change in Net Debt ........................................................................ 91

         Consolidated Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses .......................................... 92

         Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows ......................................................................................... 93

         Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements ...................................................................... 94

         Schedule 1 – Consolidated Schedule of Expenses by Object ..............................................128

         Schedule 2 – Consolidated Schedule of Salaries and Benefits ...........................................129

         Schedule 3 – Consolidated Schedule of Segment Disclosures ...........................................136




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                                                     85
Financial Information




Management’s Responsibility for Financial Reporting
The accompanying consolidated financial statements for the year ended March 31, 2020 are the
responsibility of management and have been reviewed and approved by senior management. The
consolidated financial statements were prepared in accordance with Canadian Public Sector
Accounting Standards and the financial directives issued by Alberta Health, and of necessity include
some amounts based on estimates and judgment.

To discharge its responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of financial reporting, management
maintains systems of financial management and internal control which give consideration to costs,
benefits and risks that are designed to:

        provide reasonable assurance that transactions are properly authorized, executed in
         accordance with prescribed legislation and regulations, and properly recorded so as to
         maintain accountability of public money;
        safeguard the assets and properties of the “Province of Alberta” under Alberta Health
         Services’ administration

Alberta Health Services carries out its responsibility for the consolidated financial statements
through the Audit & Risk Committee (the Committee). The Committee meets with management and
the Auditor General of Alberta to review financial matters, and recommends the consolidated
financial statements to the Alberta Health Services Board for approval upon finalization of the audit.
The Auditor General of Alberta has free access to the Committee.

The Auditor General of Alberta provides an independent audit of the consolidated financial
statements. His examination is conducted in accordance with Canadian Generally Accepted Auditing
Standards and includes tests and procedures which allow him to report on the fairness of the
consolidated financial statements prepared by management.




[Original signed by Dr. Verna Yiu, MD, FRCPC]         [Original signed by Robert Hawes, CPA, CA, ICD.D]

Dr. Verna Yiu, MD, FRCPC                                Robert Hawes, CPA, CA, ICD.D
President and Chief Executive Officer                   Interim Vice President Corporate Services and Chief
Alberta Health Services                                 Financial Officer
                                                        Alberta Health Services

June 24, 2020




86                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                         Financial Information




Independent Auditor’s Report
To the Members of the Alberta Health Services Board and the Minister of Health

Report on the Consolidated Financial Statements

Opinion
I have audited the consolidated financial statements of Alberta Health Services (the Group), which
comprise the consolidated statement of financial position as at March 31, 2020, and the consolidated
statements of operations, change in net debt, remeasurement gains and losses, and cash flows for the
year then ended and notes to the consolidated financial statements, including a summary of significant
accounting policies.
In my opinion, the accompanying consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects,
the consolidated financial position of the Group as at March 31, 2020, and the results of its operations, its
remeasurement gains and losses, its changes in net debt, and its cash flows for the year then ended in
accordance with Canadian public sector accounting standards.

Basis for opinion
I conducted my audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards. My
responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor's Responsibilities for the Audit
of the Consolidated Financial Statements section of my report. I am independent of the Group in
accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to my audit of the consolidated financial
statements in Canada, and I have fulfilled my other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these
requirements. I believe that the audit evidence I have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a
basis for my opinion.

Other information
Management is responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the information
included in the Annual Report, but does not include the consolidated financial statements and my
auditor’s report thereon. The Annual Report is expected to be made available to me after the date of this
auditor’s report.
My opinion on the consolidated financial statements does not cover the other information and I do not
express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with my audit of the consolidated financial statements, my responsibility is to read the
other information identified above and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially
inconsistent with the consolidated financial statements or my knowledge obtained in the audit, or
otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If, based on the work I will perform on this other information, I conclude that there is a material
misstatement of this other information, I am required to communicate the matter to those charged with
governance.

Responsibilities of management and those charged with governance for the consolidated financial
statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the consolidated financial
statements in accordance with Canadian public sector accounting standards, and for such internal control
as management determines is necessary to enable the preparation of the consolidated financial
statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.

In preparing the consolidated financial statements, management is responsible for assessing the Group’s
ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern and



Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                           87
Financial Information



using the going concern basis of accounting unless an intention exists to liquidate or to cease operations,
or there is no realistic alternative but to do so.
Those charged with governance are responsible for overseeing the Group’s financial reporting process.

Auditor's responsibilities for the audit of the consolidated financial statements
My objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements as
a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor's
report that includes my opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee
that an audit conducted in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards will always
detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are
considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence
the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these consolidated financial statements.
As part of an audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards, I exercise
professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit. I also:
    Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements,
     whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and
     obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion. The risk of
     not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from
     error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the
     override of internal control.
    Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures
     that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the
     effectiveness of the Group’s internal control.
    Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting
     estimates and related disclosures made by management.
    Conclude on the appropriateness of management’s use of the going concern basis of accounting and,
     based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or
     conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Group’s ability to continue as a going concern. If I
     conclude that a material uncertainty exists, I am required to draw attention in my auditor’s report to
     the related disclosures in the consolidated financial statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate,
     to modify my opinion. My conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of my
     auditor’s report. However, future events or conditions may cause the Group to cease to continue as a
     going concern.
    Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the consolidated financial statements,
     including the disclosures, and whether the consolidated financial statements represent the
     underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation.
    Obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the financial information of the entities or
     business activities within the Group to express an opinion on the consolidated financial statements. I
     am responsible for the direction, supervision and performance of the group audit. I remain solely
     responsible for my audit opinion.
I communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the planned scope
and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in internal
control that I identify during my audit.


[Original signed by W. Doug Wylie FCPA, FCMA, ICD.D]
Auditor General
June 24, 2020
Edmonton, Alberta




88                                                                             Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                             Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Consolidated Statement of Operations
Year ended March 31, 2020
(thousands of dollars)
                               CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS
                                       YEAR ENDED MARCH 31
                                                                          2020                        2019
                                                               Budget             Actual             Actual
                                                               (Note 3)
 Revenues:
  Alberta Health transfers
    Base operating                                        $     12,600,000 $       12,598,000 $       12,485,595
    One-time base operating                                              -                  -             29,558
    Other operating                                              1,294,000          1,290,302          1,192,862
    Recognition of expended deferred capital revenue                61,000             61,354             65,104
  Other government transfers (Note 4)                              427,000            434,768            429,665
  Fees and charges                                                 508,000            532,250            538,721
  Ancillary operations                                             136,000            129,129            133,513
  Donations, fundraising, and non-government
    contributions (Note 5)                                         154,000            195,980            181,319
  Investment and other income (Note 6)                             185,000            226,752            218,367

 TOTAL REVENUE                                                  15,365,000         15,468,535         15,274,704

 Expenses:
  Continuing care                                                1,157,000          1,176,468          1,137,363
  Community care                                                 1,521,000          1,525,789          1,445,283
  Home care                                                        689,000            716,561            688,295
  Acute care                                                     4,940,000          5,065,807          5,018,467
  Ambulance services                                               517,000            530,662            528,045
  Diagnostic and therapeutic services                            2,495,000          2,539,566          2,505,618
  Population and public health                                     361,000            357,117            349,669
  Research and education                                           319,000            344,634            347,239
  Information technology                                           588,000            597,005            507,326
  Support services (Note 7)                                      2,265,000          2,287,205          2,260,421
  Administration (Note 8)                                          513,000            473,544            525,609

 TOTAL EXPENSES (Schedules 1 and 3)                             15,365,000         15,614,358         15,313,335

 ANNUAL OPERATING DEFICIT                                                 -          (145,823)           (38,631)


 Accumulated surplus, beginning of year                          1,278,000          1,278,424          1,317,055
 Accumulated surplus, end of year (Note 19)               $      1,278,000 $        1,132,601 $        1,278,424

The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these consolidated financial statements.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                               89
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
As at March 31, 2020
(thousands of dollars)
                         CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION
                                       AS AT MARCH 31
                                                                             2020                   2019
                                                                            Actual                 Actual
                                                                                                  (Note 26)
 Financial Assets:
  Cash                                                                $           538,778    $            60,610
  Portfolio investments (Note 10)                                               1,483,341              2,279,068
  Accounts receivable (Note 11)                                                   610,571                366,722
                                                                                2,632,690              2,706,400

 Liabilities:
  Accounts payable and accrued liabilities (Note 12)                            1,627,584              1,505,873
  Employee future benefits (Note 13)                                              707,471                688,496
  Unexpended deferred operating revenue (Note 14)                                 405,951                453,219
  Unexpended deferred capital revenue (Note 15)                                   108,823                128,394
  Debt (Note 17)                                                                  481,551                347,642
                                                                                3,331,380              3,123,624

 NET DEBT                                                                       (698,690)               (417,224)

 Non-Financial Assets:
  Tangible capital assets (Note 18)                                             8,855,960              8,381,004
  Inventories for consumption                                                     127,298                106,509
  Prepaid expenses, deposits, and other non-financial assets                      211,480                167,722
                                                                                9,194,738              8,655,235
 NET ASSETS BEFORE EXPENDED DEFERRED CAPITAL
                                                                                8,496,048              8,238,011
 REVENUE
 Expended deferred capital revenue (Note 16)                                    7,359,615              6,925,118

 NET ASSETS                                                                     1,136,433              1,312,893

 Net Assets is comprised of:
  Accumulated surplus (Note 19)                                                 1,132,601              1,278,424
  Accumulated remeasurement gains                                                   3,832                 34,469

                                                                      $         1,136,433    $         1,312,893

Contractual Obligations and Contingent Liabilities (Note 20)
Impact of COVID-19 (Note 25)

The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these consolidated financial statements.

Approved by the Alberta Health Services Board:



[Original signed by David Weyant]                                           [Original signed by David Carpenter]

David Weyant, Q.C.                                                         David Carpenter, FCPA, FCA
Board Chair                                                                Audit & Risk Committee Chair



90                                                                                 Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Consolidated Statement of Change in Net Debt
Year ended March 31, 2020
(thousands of dollars)
                         CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGE IN NET DEBT
                                     YEAR ENDED MARCH 31
                                                                        2020                            2019
                                                             Budget              Actual                Actual
                                                             (Note 3)

   Annual operating deficit                             $               -   $      (145,823)      $        (38,631)

   Effect of changes in tangible capital assets:
    Acquisition of tangible capital assets (Note 18):
      Purchased tangible capital assets                         (542,000)          (533,483)              (593,957)
      Contributed tangible capital assets                       (496,000)          (523,196)              (285,368)
    Amortization and loss on disposals/write-downs of
      tangible capital assets (Note 18)                          554,000             581,723               529,628

   Effect of other changes:
    Net increase in expended deferred capital revenue            448,000             434,497               189,664
    Net decrease (increase) in inventories for
                                                                  22,000             (20,789)               (9,936)
      consumption
    Net decrease (increase) in prepaid expenses and
      other non-financial assets                                   1,000             (43,758)               (2,001)
    Net remeasurement gains (losses) for the year                 22,000             (30,637)               13,634

   Decrease (increase) in net debt for the year                     9,000          (281,466)              (196,967)

   Net debt, beginning of year                                  (417,000)          (417,224)              (220,257)

   Net debt, end of year                                $       (408,000)   $      (698,690)      $       (417,224)


    The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these consolidated financial statements.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                  91
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Consolidated Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses
 Year ended March 31, 2020
 (thousands of dollars)
              CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF REMEASUREMENT GAINS AND LOSSES
                                YEAR ENDED MARCH 31
                                                                          2020                           2019
                                                               Budget              Actual               Actual
                                                               (Note 3)

 Unrestricted unrealized gains (losses) attributable to:
  Derivatives                                              $             -    $             539     $          253
  Portfolio investments                                             30,000              (5,933)             17,751

 Amounts reclassified to the Consolidated Statement of
   Operations:
  Portfolio investments                                             (8,000)           (25,243)             (4,370)

 Net remeasurement gains (losses) for the year                      22,000            (30,637)              13,634
 Accumulated remeasurement gains, beginning of year                 35,000              34,469              20,835
 Accumulated remeasurement gains, end of year
 (Note 10)                                                 $        57,000    $             3,832   $       34,469

The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these consolidated financial statements.




92                                                                                 Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
Year ended March 31, 2020
(thousands of dollars)
                               CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
                                       YEAR ENDED MARCH 31
                                                                           2020                      2019
                                                                          Actual                    Actual
                                                                                                   (Note 26)
  Operating transactions:
   Annual operating deficit                                          $         (145,823)    $              (38,631)
   Non-cash items:
     Amortization and loss on disposals/write-downs of
                                                                                581,723                    529,628
        tangible capital assets
      Recognition of expended deferred capital revenue                         (404,405)                 (383,405)
   Decrease (increase) in:
     Accounts receivable related to operating transactions                     (254,073)                    48,304
     Inventories for consumption                                                (20,789)                    (9,936)
     Prepaid expenses and other non-financial assets                            (43,758)                    (2,001)
   Increase (decrease) in:
     Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
        related to operating transactions                                        100,838                     76,173
     Employee future benefits                                                     18,975                     15,360
     Unexpended deferred operating revenue                                      (60,847)                   (31,957)
  Cash (applied to) provided by operating transactions                         (228,159)                   203,535

  Capital transactions:
   Purchased tangible capital assets                                           (533,483)                 (593,957)
   Increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities related to
      capital transactions                                                        44,406                    37,368
  Cash applied to capital transactions                                         (489,077)                 (556,589)

  Investing transactions:
    Purchase of portfolio investments                                        (2,683,128)                (3,161,266)
    Proceeds on disposals of portfolio investments                             3,429,544                  3,220,278
  Cash provided by investing transactions                                        746,416                     59,012

  Financing transactions:
    Restricted capital contributions received                                   343,010                    331,363
    Unexpended deferred capital revenue returned                                 (4,398)                      (250)
    Proceeds from debt                                                          157,000                           -
    Principal payments on debt                                                  (23,091)                   (22,133)
    Payments on obligations under capital leases                                (23,814)                   (19,985)
    Net receipt (repayment) of life lease deposits                                   281                      (596)
  Cash provided by financing transactions                                       448,988                    288,399

  Increase (decrease) in cash                                                   478,168                     (5,643)

  Cash, beginning of year                                                          60,610                   66,253

  Cash, end of year                                                  $          538,778     $               60,610


The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these consolidated financial statements.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                  93
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the year ended March 31, 2020
(thousands of dollars)


Note 1        Authority, Purpose and Operations

              Alberta Health Services (AHS) was established under the Regional Health Authorities Act (Alberta),
              effective April 1, 2009, as a result of the merger of 12 formerly separate health entities in Alberta.

              Pursuant to Section 5 of the Regional Health Authorities Act (Alberta), AHS is responsible in Alberta to:
                    promote and protect the health of the population and work toward the prevention of disease and
                     injury;
                    assess on an ongoing basis the health needs of the population;
                    determine priorities in the provision of health services and allocate resources accordingly;
                    ensure that reasonable access to quality health services is provided and;
                    promote the provision of health services in a manner that is responsive to the needs of individuals
                     and communities and supports the integration of services and facilities.

              Additionally, AHS is accountable to the Minister of Health (the Minister) for the delivery and operation of
              the public health system.

              The AHS consolidated financial statements include the revenue and expenses associated with its
              responsibilities. These consolidated financial statements do not reflect the complete costs of provincial
              health care. For a complete picture of the costs of provincial health care, readers should consult the
              consolidated financial statements of the Government of Alberta (GOA).


Note 2        Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices

              (a) Basis of Presentation

                  These consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with Canadian Public
                  Sector Accounting Standards and the financial directives issued by Alberta Health (AH).

                  These consolidated financial statements reflect the assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses of the
                  reporting entity, which is comprised of the organizations controlled by AHS as noted below:

                  (i)   Controlled Entities

                        AHS controls the following three entities:

                          Alberta Precision Laboratories Ltd. (APL) (formerly Alberta Public Laboratories Ltd.) -
                           provides medical diagnostic services throughout Alberta. AHS owns 100% of the Class A
                           voting shares.
                          CapitalCare Group Inc. (CCGI) - manages continuing care programs and facilities in the
                           Edmonton area. AHS owns 100% of the Class A voting shares.
                          Carewest - manages continuing care programs and facilities in the Calgary area. AHS owns
                           99% of the Class A voting shares and 1% of the Class A voting shares are held in trust for
                           the benefit of AHS by the Chair of the Board of Directors.




94                                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                   Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 2        Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

                     AHS has majority representation on, or the right to appoint, the governance boards
                     indicating control of the following entities:

                        • Foundations:                                     Lacombe Health Trust
                          Airdrie Health Foundation                        Medicine Hat and District Health Foundation
                          Alberta Cancer Foundation                        Mental Health Foundation
                                                                           North County Health Foundation
                          American Friends of the Calgary Health Trust
                                                                           Oyen and District Health Care Foundation
                           Foundation (inactive)
                                                                           Peace River and District Health Foundation
                          Bassano and District Health Foundation
                                                                           Ponoka and District Health Foundation
                          Bow Island and District Health Foundation        Rocky Mountain House & Area Health Services
                          Brooks and District Health Foundation             Foundation
                          Calgary Health Trust                             Stettler Health Services Foundation
                          Canmore and Area Health Care Foundation          Strathcona Community Hospital Foundation
                          Cardston and District Health Foundation          Tofield and Area Health Services Foundation
                          Claresholm and District Health Foundation        Two Hills Health Centre Foundation
                          Crowsnest Pass Health Foundation                 Vermillion and Region Health and Wellness
                          David Thompson Health Trust (inactive)            Foundation (inactive)
                          Fort Macleod and District Health Foundation      Viking Health Foundation
                          Fort Saskatchewan Community Hospital             Vulcan County Health and Wellness Foundation
                            Foundation                                     Windy Slopes Health Foundation
                          Grande Cache Hospital Foundation
                          Grimshaw/Berwyn and District Hospital
                            Foundation
                          Jasper Health Care Foundation
                          Lac La Biche Regional Health Foundation

                         Provincial Health Authorities of Alberta Liability and Property Insurance Plan (LPIP)

                           LPIP’s main purpose is to share the risks of general and professional liability to lessen the
                           impact on any one subscriber. Effective April 1, 2020, LPIP ceased providing new liability
                           coverage and continues in operation for the limited purpose of winding up its affairs.

                         Queen Elizabeth II Hospital Child Care Centre

                       All inter-entity accounts and transactions between these organizations and AHS are eliminated
                       upon consolidation.

                  (ii) Government Partnerships

                       AHS proportionately consolidates its 50% interests in Primary Care Network (PCN) partnerships
                       with physician groups, its 50% interest in the Northern Alberta Clinical Trials Centre (NACTRC)
                       partnership with the University of Alberta, and its 33.33% interest in the Institute for
                       Reconstructive Sciences in Medicine (iRSM) partnership with the University of Alberta and
                       Covenant Health (Note 22).

                       AHS entered into local primary care initiative agreements to jointly manage and operate the
                       delivery of primary care services to achieve the PCN plan objectives, and to contract and hold
                       property interests required in the delivery of PCN services.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                     95
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 2        Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

                        The following PCNs are included in these consolidated financial statements on a proportionate
                        basis:
                        Alberta Heartland Primary Care Network              Lloydminster Primary Care Network
                        Aspen Primary Care Network                          McLeod River Primary Care Network
                        Big Country Primary Care Network                    Mosaic Primary Care Network
                        Bighorn Primary Care Network                        Northwest Primary Care Network
                        Bonnyville Primary Care Network                     Palliser Primary Care Network
                        Bow Valley Primary Care Network                     Peace Region Primary Care Network
                        Calgary Foothills Primary Care Network              Peaks to Prairies Primary Care Network
                        Calgary Rural Primary Care Network                  Provost Primary Care Network
                        Calgary West Central Primary Care Network           Red Deer Primary Care Network
                        Camrose Primary Care Network                        Rocky Mountain House Primary Care Network
                        Chinook Primary Care Network                        Saddle Hills Primary Care Network (formerly
                        Cold Lake Primary Care Network                       Sexsmith / Spirit River Primary Care Network and
                        Drayton Valley Primary Care Network                  West Peace Region Primary Care Network)
                        Edmonton North Primary Care Network                 Sherwood Park/Strathcona County Primary Care
                        Edmonton Oliver Primary Care Network                 Network
                        Edmonton Southside Primary Care Network             South Calgary Primary Care Network
                        Edmonton West Primary Care Network                  St. Albert & Sturgeon Primary Care Network
                        Grande Prairie Primary Care Network                 Wainwright Primary Care Network
                        Highland Primary Care Network                       WestView Primary Care Network
                        Kalyna Country Primary Care Network                 Wetaskiwin and Area Primary Care Network
                        Lakeland Primary Care Network                       Wolf Creek Primary Care Network
                        Leduc Beaumont Devon Primary Care Network           Wood Buffalo Primary Care Network


                        All inter-entity accounts and transactions between these organizations and AHS are eliminated
                        upon consolidation.

                  (iii) Trusts under Administration

                        These consolidated financial statements do not include trusts administered on behalf of others
                        (Note 23). AHS provides services to certain entities not included in these consolidated financial
                        statements.

                  (iv) Other

                        AHS is responsible for the delivery and operation of the public health system in Alberta (Note 1),
                        and contracts with various voluntary and private health service providers to provide health
                        services throughout Alberta. The largest of these service providers is Covenant Health, a
                        denominational health care organization, providing a full spectrum of care. Covenant Health is
                        an independent, separate legal entity with a separate Board of Directors and accordingly, these
                        consolidated financial statements do not include their assets, liabilities or results of operations.
                        However, the payments for contracts with health service providers such as Covenant Health are
                        recorded as expenses in the Consolidated Statement of Operations.




96                                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                          Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 2        Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

             (b) Revenue Recognition

                  Revenue is recognized in the year in which the transactions or events that give rise to the revenue
                  as described below occur. All revenue is recorded on an accrual basis, except when the accrual
                  cannot be determined within a reasonable degree of certainty or when estimation is impracticable.

                  (i)   Government Transfers

                        Transfers from AH, other GOA ministries and agencies, and other government entities are
                        referred to as government transfers.

                        Government transfers and the associated externally restricted investment income are recorded
                        as deferred revenue if the eligibility criteria for the use of the transfer, or the stipulations together
                        with AHS’ actions and communications as to the use of the transfer, create a liability. These
                        transfers are recognized as revenue as the stipulations are met and, when applicable, AHS
                        complies with the communicated use of the transfer.

                        All other government transfers, without stipulations for the use of the transfer, are recorded as
                        revenue when the transfer is authorized and AHS meets the eligibility criteria.

                        Deferred revenue consists of unexpended deferred operating revenue, unexpended deferred
                        capital revenue, and expended deferred capital revenue. The term deferred revenue in these
                        consolidated financial statements refers to the components of deferred revenue as described.

                        Unallocated costs comprising of materials and services contributed by related parties in support
                        of AHS’ operations, are not recognized in these consolidated financial statements.

                  (ii) Donations, Fundraising, and Non-Government Contributions

                        Donations, fundraising, and non-government contributions are received from individuals,
                        corporations, and other not-for-profit organizations. Donations, fundraising, and non-government
                        contributions may be unrestricted or externally restricted for operating or capital purposes.

                        Unrestricted donations, fundraising, and non-government contributions are recorded as revenue
                        in the year received or in the year the funds are committed to AHS if the amount can be
                        reasonably estimated and collection is reasonably assured.

                        Externally restricted donations, fundraising, non-government contributions, and the associated
                        externally restricted investment income are recorded as deferred revenue if the terms for their
                        use, or the terms along with AHS’ actions and communications as to their use create a liability.
                        These resources are recognized as revenue as the terms are met and, when applicable, AHS
                        complies with the communicated use.

                        In-kind donations of services and materials from non-related parties are recorded at fair value
                        when such value can reasonably be determined. While volunteers contribute a significant
                        amount of time each year to assist AHS, the value of their services is not recognized as revenue
                        and expenses in the consolidated financial statements because fair value cannot be reasonably
                        determined.

                  (iii) Transfers and Donations related to Land

                        Transfers and donations for the purchase of land are recognized as deferred revenue when
                        received and as revenue when the land is purchased.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                              97
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 2        Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

                   (iv) Fees and Charges, Ancillary Operations, and Other Income

                         Fees and charges, ancillary operations, and other income are recognized in the year that goods
                         are delivered or services are provided by AHS. Amounts received for which goods or services
                         have not been provided by year end are recorded as deferred revenue.

                   (v) Investment Income

                         Investment income includes dividend income, interest income, and realized gains or losses on
                         the sale of portfolio investments. Unrealized gains and losses on portfolio investments exclusive
                         of restricted transfers or donations are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of
                         Remeasurement Gains and Losses until the related portfolio investments are sold. When
                         realized, these gains or losses are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Operations.
                         Investment income and unrealized gains and losses from restricted transfers or donations are
                         allocated to their respective balances according to the provisions within the individual funding
                         agreements.

              (c) Expenses

                  Expenses are reported on an accrual basis. The cost of all goods consumed and services received during
                  the year are expensed. Interest expense includes debt servicing costs.

                  Expenses include grants and transfers under shared cost agreements. Grants and transfers are
                  recorded as expenses when the transfer is authorized and eligibility criteria have been met by the
                  recipient.

              (d) Financial Instruments

                  Financial instruments comprise financial assets and liabilities. Financial assets are assets that could
                  be used to discharge existing liabilities or finance future operations and are not for consumption in
                  the normal course of operations. Liabilities are present obligations of AHS to others arising from past
                  transactions or events occurring before the year end, the settlement of which is expected to result in
                  the future sacrifice of economic benefits.

                  All of AHS’ financial assets and liabilities are initially recorded at their fair value. The following table
                  identifies AHS’ financial assets and liabilities and identifies how they are subsequently measured:

                        Financial Assets and Liabilities       Subsequent Measurement and Recognition
                        Portfolio investments                  Measured at fair value with unrealized changes in fair
                                                               values recognized in the Consolidated Statement of
                                                               Remeasurement Gains and Losses or deferred revenue
                                                               until realized, at which time the cumulative changes in fair
                                                               value are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of
                                                               Operations.

                        Accounts receivable, accrued           Measured at amortized cost.
                        vacation pay, accounts payable and
                        accrued liabilities and debt




98                                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                       Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 2        Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

                   AHS records equity investments quoted in an active market to be recorded under the fair value
                   category and AHS may choose to record other financial assets under the fair value category if there
                   is an investment strategy to evaluate the performance of a group of these financial assets on a fair
                   value basis. AHS has elected to record all portfolio investments at fair value. The three levels of
                   information that may be used to measure fair value are:

                          Level 1 – Unadjusted quoted market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities;
                          Level 2 – Observable or corroborated inputs, other than level 1, such as quoted prices for
                           similar assets or liabilities in inactive markets or market data for substantially the full term of
                           the assets or liabilities; and
                          Level 3 – Unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and that are
                           significant to the fair value of the assets and liabilities.

                   AHS measures and recognizes embedded derivatives separately from the host contract when the
                   economic characteristics and risk of the embedded derivative are not closely related to those of the
                   host contract, when it meets the definition of a derivative and, when the entire contract is not
                   measured at fair value.

                   Derivatives are recorded at fair value in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. Derivatives
                   with a positive or negative fair value are recognized as increases or decreases to portfolio
                   investments. Unrealized gains and losses from changes in the fair value of derivatives are recognized
                   in the Consolidated Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses.

                   All financial assets are assessed for impairment on an annual basis. When a decline is determined
                   to be other than temporary, the amount of the loss is reported as a realized loss on the Consolidated
                   Statement of Operations.

                   Transaction costs associated with the acquisition and disposal of portfolio investments are expensed
                   as incurred. Investment management fees are expensed as incurred. The purchase and sale of
                   portfolio investments are accounted for using trade date accounting.

             (e) Cash

                   Cash is comprised of cash on hand. Cash on hand includes amounts in interest bearing accounts
                   held for the purpose of meeting short-term commitments rather than for investment purposes.

             (f)   Inventories For Consumption

                   Inventories for consumption are valued at lower of cost (defined as moving average cost) and
                   replacement cost.

             (g) Tangible Capital Assets

                   Tangible capital assets and work in progress are recorded at cost, which includes amounts that are
                   directly related to the acquisition, design, construction, development, improvement, or betterment of
                   the assets. Cost includes overhead directly attributable to construction and development as well as
                   interest costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition or construction of the asset. Costs
                   incurred by Alberta Infrastructure (AI) to build tangible capital assets on behalf of AHS are recorded
                   by AHS as work in progress as AI incurs costs.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                           99
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 2        Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

                  Contributed tangible capital assets from non-related entities are recognized at their fair value at the
                  date of the contribution when fair value can be reasonably determined. When AHS cannot determine
                  the fair value, it records such contributions at nominal value.

                  The costs less residual values of tangible capital assets, excluding land, are amortized over their
                  estimated useful lives on a straight-line basis as follows:
                                                                           Useful Life
                    Facilities and improvements                            10-40 years
                    Equipment                                              3-20 years
                    Information systems                                    3-15 years
                    Building service equipment                             5-40 years
                    Land improvements                                      5-40 years

                  Work in progress, which includes facility and improvement projects and development of information
                  systems, is not amortized until after a project is substantially complete and the tangible capital assets
                  are available for or in use.

                  Leases transferring substantially all benefits and risks of tangible capital asset ownership are
                  classified as capital leases and reported as tangible capital assets. Capital leases and leasehold
                  improvements are amortized over the term of the lease. Capital lease obligations associated with
                  these capital leases are recorded at the present value of the minimum lease payments excluding
                  executory costs (e.g. insurance, maintenance costs, etc.) and reported as obligations under capital
                  leases. The discount rate used to determine the present value of the lease payments is the lower of
                  AHS’ rate for incremental borrowing and the interest rate implicit in the lease.

                  Tangible capital assets are written down to their net recoverable amounts when conditions indicate
                  that they no longer contribute to AHS’ ability to provide goods and services or when the value of
                  future economic benefits associated with the tangible capital assets are less than their net book value.
                  Net write-downs are accounted for as expenses in the Consolidated Statement of Operations.

                  Works of art, historical treasures, and collections are not recognized as tangible capital assets.

              (h) Employee Future Benefits

                  (i)   Defined Benefit Pension Plans

                        Local Authorities Pension Plan (LAPP) and Management Employees Pension Plan (MEPP)

                        AHS participates in LAPP and MEPP which are registered defined benefit pension plans. These
                        multi-employer public sector defined benefit plans provide pensions for participants for each year
                        of pensionable service based on the average salary of the highest five consecutive years, up to
                        the average Canada Pension Plan’s Year’s Maximum Pensionable Earnings (YMPE), over the
                        same five consecutive year period. Benefits for post-1991 service payable under these plans are
                        limited by the Income Tax Act (Canada). Prior to March 1, 2019, the President of Alberta
                        Treasury Board and Minister of Finance was the legal trustee and administrator for LAPP and
                        MEPP. Although there has been no change in MEPP governance, effective March 1, 2019, LAPP
                        Corporation became the legislated administrator and trustee of LAPP. As a participating
                        government organization, AHS accounts for these plans on a defined contribution basis.
                        Accordingly, the pension expense recorded for these plans in these consolidated financial
                        statements is comprised of the employer contributions that AHS is required to pay for its
                        employees during the fiscal year, which are calculated based on actuarially pre-determined
                        amounts that are expected to provide the plan’s future benefits.




100                                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                   Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 2        Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

                       Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan (SERP)

                       The SERP covers certain employees and supplements the benefits under AHS’ registered plans
                       that are limited by the Income Tax Act (Canada). The SERP has been closed to new entrants
                       since April 1, 2009. The SERP provides future pension benefits to participants based on years
                       of service and earnings.

                       As required under the Income Tax Act (Canada), approximately half of the assets are held in a
                       non-interest bearing Refundable Tax Account with the Canada Revenue Agency. The remaining
                       assets of the SERP are invested in a combination of Canadian equities and Canadian fixed
                       income securities.

                  (ii) Defined Contribution Pension Plans

                       Group Registered Retirement Savings Plans (GRRSPs)

                       AHS sponsors GRRSPs for certain employee groups. Under the GRRSPs, AHS matches a
                       certain percentage of any contribution made by plan participants up to certain limits. AHS also
                       sponsors a defined contribution pension plan for certain employee groups where the employee
                       and employer each contribute specified percentages of pensionable earnings.

                       Supplemental Pension Plan (SPP)

                       Subsequent to April 1, 2009, staff that would have otherwise been eligible for SERP have been
                       enrolled in a defined contribution SPP. The SPP supplements the benefits under AHS registered
                       plans that are limited by the Income Tax Act (Canada). AHS contributes a percentage of an
                       eligible employee’s pensionable earnings, in excess of the limits of the Income Tax Act (Canada).
                       The SPP provides participants with an account balance at retirement based on the contributions
                       made to the plan and investment income earned on the contributions based on investment
                       decisions made by the participant.

                  (iii) Other Benefit Plans

                       Accumulating Non-Vesting Sick Leave

                       Sick leave benefits accumulate with employees’ service and are provided by AHS to certain
                       employee groups of AHS, as defined by employment agreements, to cover illness related
                       absences that are outside of short-term and long-term disability coverage. Benefit amounts are
                       determined and accumulate with reference to employees’ final earnings at the time they are paid
                       out. The cost of the accumulating non-vesting sick leave benefits is expensed as the benefits
                       are earned.

                       AHS recognizes a liability and expense for accumulating non-vesting sick leave benefits using
                       an actuarial cost method as the employees render services to earn the benefits. The liability and
                       expense is determined using the projected benefit method pro-rated for service and
                       management’s best estimates of expected discount rate, inflation, rate of compensation
                       increase, termination and retirement dates, and mortality. Actuarial gains and losses are
                       amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected average remaining service life of the related
                       employee groups.

                       AHS does not record a liability for sick leave benefits that do not accumulate beyond the current
                       reporting year as these are renewed annually.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                     101
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 2        Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

                        Other Benefits

                        AHS provides its employees with basic life, accidental death and dismemberment, short-term
                        disability, long-term disability, extended health, dental, and vision benefits through benefits
                        carriers. AHS fully accrues its obligations for employee non-pension future benefits.

              (i)   Liability for Contaminated Sites

                    Contaminated sites are a result of contamination being introduced into air, soil, water, or sediment of
                    a chemical, organic or radioactive material or live organism that exceeds an environmental standard.
                    A liability for remediation of contaminated sites is recognized when all of the following criteria are
                    met:

                        (i)     an environmental standard exists;
                        (ii)    contamination exceeds the environmental standard;
                        (iii)   AHS is directly responsible or accepts responsibility;
                        (iv)    it is expected that future economic benefits will be given up; and
                        (v)     a reasonable estimate of the amount can be made.

              (j)   Foreign Currency Translation

                    Transaction amounts denominated in foreign currencies are translated into their Canadian dollar
                    equivalents at exchange rates prevailing at the transaction dates. Carrying values of monetary assets
                    and liabilities and non-monetary items included in the fair value category reflect the exchange rates
                    at the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position date. Unrealized foreign exchange gains and
                    losses are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses.

                    In the year of settlement, foreign exchange gains and losses are reclassified to the Consolidated
                    Statement of Operations, and the cumulative amount of remeasurement gains and losses are
                    reversed in the Consolidated Statement of Remeasurement Gains and Losses.

              (k) Reserves

                    Certain amounts, as approved by the AHS Board, may be set aside in accumulated surplus for use
                    by AHS for future purposes. Transfers to, or from, are recorded to the respective reserve account
                    when approved. Reserves include Invested in Tangible Capital Assets, Internally Restricted Surplus
                    for Future Purposes, and Internally Restricted Surplus for Insurance Equity Requirements and
                    Foundations.

              (l)   Measurement Uncertainty

                    The consolidated financial statements, by their nature, contain estimates and are subject to
                    measurement uncertainty. Measurement uncertainty exists when there is a difference between the
                    recognized or disclosed amount and another reasonably possible amount. These estimates and
                    assumptions are reviewed at least annually. Actual results could differ from the estimates determined
                    by management in these consolidated financial statements, and these differences could require
                    adjustment in subsequent reporting years. Significant estimates include: amortization of tangible
                    capital assets, recognition of expended deferred capital revenue, employee future benefits, provision
                    for unpaid claims, accrued liabilities and allowance for doubtful accounts.




102                                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                    Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 2        Significant Accounting Policies and Reporting Practices (continued)

             (m) Future Accounting Changes

                  The following accounting standards are applicable in future years:

                          PS 3280 – Asset Retirement Obligations (effective April 1, 2021)
                           PS 3280 provides guidance on how to account for and report a liability for retirement of a
                           tangible capital asset. AHS has completed an initial review of the standard and conducted a
                           preliminary assessment of tangible capital assets impacted. Based on the scoping work
                           performed to date, AHS has identified the asset categories of Facilities and Equipment as
                           the assets primarily impacted by this standard. In-depth discussions continue as AHS
                           considers the nature and related cost estimates of, the applicable retirement obligations for
                           these assets. The overall impact of adopting this standard on the future consolidated financial
                           statements continues to be assessed.

                          PS 3400 – Revenue (effective April 1, 2022)
                           PS 3400 provides guidance on how to account for and report revenue, and specifically, it
                           differentiates between revenue arising from exchange and non-exchange transactions. AHS
                           is currently assessing what the impact of this standard will have on future consolidated
                           financial statements.


Note 3        Budget

              The AHS Health Plan and Business Plan, which included the 2019-20 annual budget, was approved by
              the AHS Board on December 11, 2019 for submission to the Minister who approved it on
              January 28, 2020.


Note 4        Other Government Transfers

                                                                       Budget               2020             2019
         Unrestricted operating                                    $      32,000       $      34,035     $    32,790
         Restricted operating (Note 14)                                  113,000              92,152         114,269
         Recognition of expended deferred capital revenue                282,000             308,581         282,606
         (Note 16)
                                                                   $       427,000     $     434,768     $   429,665

                Other government transfers include $425,845 (2019 – $420,622) transferred from the GOA, $8,923
                (2019 – $9,043) from government entities outside the GOA, and exclude amounts from AH as these
                amounts are separately disclosed on the Consolidated Statement of Operations.


Note 5        Donations, Fundraising, and Non-Government Contributions

                                                                       Budget               2020              2019
         Unrestricted operating                                    $       3,000       $       3,940     $      4,073
         Restricted operating (Note 14)                                  124,000             157,289          141,088
         Recognition of expended deferred capital revenue                 27,000              34,470           35,695
         (Note 16)
         Endowment contributions                                                 -               281              463
                                                                   $       154,000     $     195,980     $    181,319




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                      103
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 6        Investment and Other Income
                                                                         Budget               2020               2019
         Investment income                                         $        65,000     $        80,243     $      68,521
         Other income:
            GOA (Note 21)                                                    34,000             28,077            30,847
            AH                                                                    -             12,562            12,698
            Other                                                            86,000            105,870           106,301
                                                                   $        185,000    $       226,752     $     218,367

              The Other balance of $105,870 (2019 - $106,301) mainly relates to recoveries for services provided to
              third parties.

Note 7        Support Services

                                                                 Budget               2020                     2019
          Facilities operations                              $     913,000       $     905,659       $            893,599
          Patient: health records, food services, and                                  436,326
           transportation                                              439,000                                   424,288
          Housekeeping, laundry, and linen                             224,000          220,500                  217,296
          Materials management                                         177,000          177,684                  174,916
          Support services expense of full-spectrum
             contracted health service providers                     157,000            152,542                   154,714
          Ancillary operations                                       108,000             97,099                   103,122
          Fundraising expenses and grants awarded                     48,000             48,635                    45,689
          Emergency preparedness services                              6,000              5,847                     5,255
          Other                                                      193,000            242,913                   241,542
                                                             $     2,265,000     $    2,287,205      $          2,260,421


Note 8        Administration

                                                                 Budget               2020                  2019
          General administration                            $      258,000       $     220,679      $          272,241
          Human resources                                          116,000             114,865                 115,901
          Finance                                                   74,000              74,969                  73,075
          Communications                                            27,000              24,771                  24,415
          Administration expense of full-spectrum
            contracted health service providers                      38,000             38,260                    39,977
                                                            $       513,000      $     473,544      $            525,609


Note 9        Financial Risk Management

              AHS is exposed to a variety of financial risks associated with its financial instruments. These financial
              risks include market risk, credit risk, and liquidity risk.

              (a) Market Risk

                  Market risk is the risk that the fair value or future cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate
                  due to changes in market prices. Market risk is comprised of three types of risk: price risk, interest
                  rate risk, and foreign currency risk.




104                                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                        Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 9        Financial Risk Management (continued)

                  In order to earn financial returns at an acceptable level of market risk, the consolidated investment
                  portfolio is governed by investment bylaws and policies with clearly established target asset mixes.
                  The target assets range between 0% and 100% for cash and money market securities, 0% to 80%
                  for fixed income securities and 0% to 70% for equity holdings.

                  Risk is reduced through asset class diversification, diversification within each asset class, and
                  portfolio quality constraints governing the quality of portfolio holdings.

                  AHS assesses the sensitivity of its portfolio to market risk based on historical volatility of equity and
                  fixed income markets. Volatility is determined using a ten year average based on fixed income and
                  equity market fluctuations and is applied to the total portfolio. Based on the volatility average of 3.24%
                  (2019 – 2.26%) increase or decrease, with all other variables held constant, the portfolio could expect
                  an increase or decrease in accumulated remeasurement gains and losses and unrealized net gains
                  and losses attributable to unexpended deferred operating revenue of $28,877 (2019 – $38,130).

                       (i) Price Risk

                           Price risk relates to the possibility that equity portfolio investments will change in fair value
                           due to future fluctuations in market prices caused by factors specific to an individual equity
                           investment or other factors affecting all equities traded in the market. AHS is exposed to
                           price risk associated with the underlying equity portfolio investments held in pooled funds. If
                           equity market indices (S&P/TSX, S&P1500 and MSCI ACWI and their sectors) declined by
                           10%, and all other variables are held constant, the potential loss in fair value to AHS would
                           be approximately $42,045 or 2.84% of total portfolio investments (March 31, 2019 – $50,535
                           or 2.22%).

                           In March 2020, the COVID-19 global pandemic resulted in an overall reduction of market
                           prices for equities traded in the market at year-end. AHS is invested primarily in interest
                           bearing securities (money market and fixed income securities) and this diversification served
                           to mitigate price risk for AHS. As a result of this diversification, AHS did not realize significant
                           losses in March 2020.

                       (ii) Interest Rate Risk

                           Interest rate risk is the risk that the value of a financial instrument might be adversely affected
                           by a change in market interest rates. AHS manages the interest rate risk exposure of its fixed
                           income securities by management of average duration and laddered maturity dates.

                           AHS is exposed to interest rate risk through its investments in fixed income securities with
                           both fixed and floating interest rates. AHS has fixed interest rate loans for all debt, thereby
                           mitigating interest rate risk from rate fluctuations over the term of the outstanding debt. The
                           fair value of fixed rate debt fluctuates with changes in market interest rates but the related
                           future cash flows will not change.

                           In general, investment returns for fixed income securities are sensitive to changes in the
                           level of interest rates, with longer term interest bearing securities being more sensitive to
                           interest rate changes than shorter term bonds.

                           A 1% change in market yield relating to fixed income securities would have increased or
                           decreased fair value by approximately $53,634 (March 31, 2019 – $78,148).




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                           105
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 9        Financial Risk Management (continued)

                           Fixed income securities have the following average maturity structure:

                                                                           2020                              2019
                            0 – 5 years                                    56%                               77%
                            6 – 10 years                                   20%                                8%
                            Over 10 years                                  24%                               15%

                                                                           Average Effective Market Yield
                            Asset Class                                    2020                         2019
                            Fixed income securities                       1.98%                        2.47%

                        (iii) Foreign Currency Risk

                           Foreign currency risk is the risk that the fair value of future cash flows of a financial instrument
                           will fluctuate because of changes in foreign exchange rates. The fair value of cash and
                           portfolio investments denominated in foreign currencies is translated into Canadian dollars
                           on a daily basis using the reporting date exchange rate. Both the realized gain/loss and
                           remeasurement gain/loss comprise actual gains or losses on the underlying instrument as
                           well as changes in foreign exchange rates at the time of the valuation. AHS is exposed to
                           foreign exchange fluctuations on its cash denominated in foreign currencies. AHS is also
                           exposed to changes in the valuation on its global equity funds attributable to fluctuations in
                           foreign currency.

                           Foreign currency risk is managed by the investment policies which limit non-Canadian
                           equities to a maximum of 10% to 45% of the total investment portfolio, depending on the
                           policy. At March 31, 2020, investments in non-Canadian equities represented 18.4% (March
                           31, 2019 – 14.5%) of total portfolio investments.

                           Foreign exchange fluctuations on cash balances are mitigated by derivatives and holding
                           minimal foreign currency cash balances. At March 31, 2020, AHS held US dollar forward
                           contracts with ATB Financial to manage currency fluctuations relating to its US dollar
                           accounts payable requirements. As at March 31, 2020, AHS held derivatives in the form of
                           forward contracts for future settlement of $12,000 (2019 – $18,000). The fair value of these
                           forward contracts as at March 31, 2020 was $1,253 (2019 – $714) and is included in portfolio
                           investments (Note 10).

              (b) Credit Risk

                  Credit risk is the risk of loss arising from the failure of a counterparty to fully honour its contractual
                  obligations. The credit quality of financial assets is generally assessed by reference to external credit
                  ratings. Credit risk can also lead to losses when issuers and debtors are downgraded by credit rating
                  agencies. The investment policies restrict the types and proportions of eligible investments, thus
                  mitigating AHS’ exposure to credit risk.

                  Accounts receivable primarily consists of amounts receivable from AH, other Alberta government
                  reporting entities, patients, other provinces and territories, and the federal government. AHS
                  periodically reviews the collectability of its accounts receivable and establishes an allowance based
                  on its best estimate of potentially uncollectible amounts.




106                                                                                         Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                        Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 9        Financial Risk Management (continued)

                  Under the investment bylaw and policies governing the consolidated investment portfolio, money
                  market securities are limited to a rating of R1 or equivalent or higher, and no more than 10% may be
                  invested in any one issuer unless guaranteed by the Government of Canada or a Canadian province.
                  Investments in corporate bonds are limited to BBB or equivalent rated bonds or higher and no more
                  than 40% of the total fixed income securities. Investments in debt and equity of any one issuer are
                  limited to 5% of the issuer’s total debt and equity. AHS holds unrated mortgage fund investments
                  which are classified as part of AHS’ fixed income securities. Short selling is not permitted.

                  The following table summarizes AHS’ investment in debt securities by counterparty credit rating at
                  March 31, 2020. The unrated securities consist of low volatility pooled mortgages that are not rated
                  on an active market.

                     Credit Rating                                                  2020                          2019
                     Investment Grade (AAA to BBB)                                   89%                          87%
                     Unrated                                                         11%                          13%
                                                                                    100%                          100%

              (c) Liquidity Risk

                  Liquidity risk is the risk that AHS will encounter difficulty in meeting obligations associated with
                  financial liabilities that are settled by delivery of cash or another financial asset. Liquidity requirements
                  of AHS are met through funding provided in advance by AH, income generated from portfolio
                  investments, and by investing in liquid assets, such as money market securities, fixed income
                  securities and equities traded in an active market that are easily sold and converted to cash. Short
                  term borrowing to meet financial obligations would be available through established credit facilities
                  as described in Note 17(b).


Note 10       Portfolio Investments


                                                                          2020                            2019
                                                                Fair Value          Cost       Fair Value            Cost
     Cash held for investing purposes                          $    112,072 $        112,072 $     110,887 $          110,887

     Interest bearing securities:
       Money market securities                                        38,076          38,076         177,199           177,199
       Fixed income securities                                       902,690         888,059       1,485,637         1,467,856
                                                                     940,766         926,135       1,662,836         1,645,055

     Equities:
      Canadian equity investments                                     44,554          47,368          45,866              38,488
      Canadian equity funds                                           66,937          73,807         129,525             119,364
      Global equity funds                                            278,175         256,183         329,954             288,454
                                                                     389,666         377,358         505,345             446,306

     Real estate pooled funds                                         40,837          40,267                  -                   -

                                                               $ 1,483,341 $ 1,455,832 $ 2,279,068 $                 2,202,248




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                           107
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 10        Portfolio Investments (continued)

                                                                              2020                                       2019
       Items at Fair Value
         Portfolio investments designated to the fair           $                      1,437,534       $                        2,232,488
          value category
         Portfolio investments in equity instruments that
          are quoted in an active market                                                  44,554                                   45,866
         Derivatives                                                                       1,253                                      714
                                                                $                      1,483,341       $                        2,279,068

      Included in portfolio investments is $233,282 (March 31, 2019 – $212,323) that is restricted for use as per the
      requirements in Sections 99 and 100 of the Insurance Act of Alberta. Endowment principal included in portfolio
      investments amounts to $75,438 (March 31, 2019 – $75,157).

      The following are the total net remeasurement gains on portfolio investments:
                                                                                             2020                         2019
       Accumulated remeasurement gains                                        $                      3,832       $               34,469
       Restricted unrealized net gains attributable to unexpended
        deferred operating revenue (Note 14(b))                                                     23,677                       42,351
                                                                              $                     27,509       $               76,820

      Fair Value Hierarchy

                                                                                      2020
                                         Level 1                    Level 2                    Level 3                     Total
       Cash held for investing
         purposes                   $        112,072        $                     -     $                    -       $          112,072
       Interest bearing
       securities:
         Money market securities                     -                   38,076                           -                      38,076
         Fixed income securities                     -                  827,477                      75,213                     902,690
       Equities:
         Canadian equity
          investments                         44,554                     66,937                           -                   111,491
         Global equity funds                       -                    278,175                           -                   278,175
       Real estate pooled funds                    -                          -                      40,837                    40,837
                                    $        156,626        $         1,210,665         $           116,050          $      1,483,341
       Percent of total                         10%                        82%                          8%                      100%

                                                                                      2019
                                         Level 1                    Level 2                    Level 3                     Total
       Cash held for investing
         purposes                   $        110,887        $                     -     $                    -       $          110,887
       Interest bearing
       securities:
         Money market securities                     -                  177,199                           -                   177,199
         Fixed income securities                     -                1,320,899                     164,738                 1,485,637
       Equities:
         Canadian equity
          investments                         45,866                    129,525                           -                   175,391
         Global equity funds                       -                    329,954                           -                   329,954
                                    $        156,753        $         1,957,577         $           164,738          $      2,279,068
       Percent of total                          7%                        86%                          7%                      100%



108                                                                                                 Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                   Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 10       Portfolio Investments (continued)

              Reconciliation of Investments classified as level 3.

                                                                                       2020
                                                              Fixed income         Real estate
                                                               securities        pooled funds                Total
      Balance at beginning of year                          $      164,738       $             -    $           164,738
      Purchases                                                       4,763             40,268                   45,031
      Sales                                                        (94,716)                    -               (94,716)
      Gain (loss) included in the Consolidated Statement
        of Remeasurement Gains and Losses                               447                 569                     1,016
      Transfers in (out)                                                (19)                  -                       (19)
      Balance at end of year                                $        75,213      $       40,837     $             116,050

                                                                                   2019
                                                                 Fixed
                                                               income          Real estate
                                                              securities      pooled funds                      Total
     Balance at beginning of year                           $         147,014   $                       -   $     147,014
     Purchases                                                         13,861                           -          13,861
     Sales                                                                  -                           -               -
     Gain (loss) included in the Consolidated Statement                                                 -
       of Remeasurement Gains and Losses                                 1,044                                      1,044
     Transfers in (out)                                                  2,819                          -           2,819
     Balance at end of year                                 $          164,738       $                  -   $     164,738


Note 11       Accounts Receivable

                                                             2020                                               2019
                                                          Allowance
                                                                                                              Net
                                            Gross        for Doubtful                    Net
                                                                                                            (Note 26)
                                                          Accounts
    Patient accounts receivable       $        134,190 $        34,214 $                   99,976 $               106,526
    AH operating transfers
                                                268,119                    -              268,119                  36,768
     receivable
    AH capital transfers receivable              40,707                    -               40,707                  34,356
    Other operating transfers
     receivable                                  21,667                    -               21,667                  14,824
    Other capital transfers
                                                 62,716                    -               62,716                  79,291
     receivable
    Other accounts receivable                   118,188                 802               117,386                  94,957
                                      $         645,587 $            35,016 $             610,571 $               366,722

              Accounts receivable are unsecured and non-interest bearing. At March 31, 2019, the total allowance for
              doubtful accounts was $28,966.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                        109
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 12       Accounts Payable and Accrued Liabilities

                                                                                  2020                      2019
                Payroll remittances payable and related accrued
                                                                         $             611,513      $            543,427
                 liabilities
                Trade accounts payable and accrued liabilities                         636,041                   608,740
                Provision for unpaid claims(a)                                         208,830                   202,511
                Obligations under capital leases(b)                                    103,990                    97,053
                Other liabilities                                                       67,210                    54,142
                                                                         $           1,627,584      $          1,505,873

              Accounts payable and accrued liabilities includes payables related to the purchase of tangible capital
              assets of $305,843 (2019 – $284,970). Of these amounts, $13,002 (2019 – $ 12,721) comprise life lease
              deposits received from tenants of certain AHS’ long term care facilities and amounts payable to the
              Ministry of Infrastructure of $109,150 (2019 – $65,000) related to a project funded by debt.

             (a) Provision for Unpaid Claims is an estimate of liability claims against AHS. It is influenced by factors
                 such as historical trends involving claim payment patterns, pending levels of unpaid claims, claims
                 severity and claim frequency patterns.

                  The provision has been estimated using the discounted value of claim liabilities using a discount rate
                  of 2.25% (2019 – 2.45%) plus a provision for adverse deviation, based on actuarial estimates. –
                  deviation, based on actuarial estimates.

             (b) Obligations under capital leases include a site lease with the University of Calgary, vehicle leases,
                 obligations related to a clinical information system and site leases for ambulance services.

                  The obligations will be settled between 2020 and 2036 and have an implicit interest rate payable
                  ranging from 1.93% to 5.07% (2019 – 2.37% to 7.04%).

                  AHS is committed to making payments for obligations under capital leases as follows:

                                Year ended March 31                              Minimum Contract Payments
                                       2021                                  $              29,041
                                       2022                                                 27,427
                                       2023                                                 14,536
                                       2024                                                  4,738
                                       2025                                                  4,364
                                     Thereafter                                             40,328
                                                                                           120,434
                                    Less: interest                                         (16,444)
                                                                             $             103,990

             (c) Liability for Contaminated Sites

                  At March 31, 2020, AHS has not identified or accepted any liability for contaminated sites (2019 –
                  $nil).




110                                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                      Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 13       Employee Future Benefits


                                                                                    2020                      2019
               Accrued vacation pay                                        $            582,819          $       566,415
               Accumulating non-vesting sick leave(a)                                   124,652                  122,081
               Registered defined benefit pension plans(b) (c)                                -                        -
                                                                           $            707,471          $       688,496

             (a) Accumulating Non-Vesting Sick Leave

                  Sick leave benefits are paid by AHS; there are no employee contributions and no assets set aside to
                  support the obligation.

                                                                                     2020                     2019
                 Funded status – deficit                                   $             153,419      $          103,857
                 Unamortized net actuarial (loss) gain                                  (28,767)                  18,224
                 Accrued benefit liability                                 $             124,652      $          122,081

                  Key assumptions used in the determination of the accumulating non-vesting sick leave liability are:

                                                                                             2020               2019
                 Estimated average remaining service life                                    13 years            13 years
                 Draw down rate of accumulated non-vesting sick leave bank                    18.30%              16.50%
                 Discount rate – beginning of year                                             3.51%               3.38%
                 Discount rate – end of year                                                   2.14%               3.51%
                 Rate of compensation increase per year                                       2019-20             2018-19
                                                                                               0.75%               0.75%
                                                                                              2020-21             2019-20
                                                                                               0.75%               0.75%
                                                                                            Thereafter          Thereafter
                                                                                               2.75%               2.75%


             (b) Local Authorities Pension Plan (LAPP)

                  (i) AHS Participation in the LAPP

                       The majority of AHS employees participate in the LAPP. AHS’ employees comprise
                       approximately 46% (2019-46%) of the total membership in LAPP. AHS is not responsible for
                       future funding of the plan deficit other than through contribution increases. As AHS is exposed
                       to the risk of contribution rate increases, the following disclosure is provided to explain this risk.

                       The LAPP provides for a pension of 1.4% for each year of pensionable service based on the
                       average salary of the highest five consecutive years up to the average Canada Pension Plan’s
                       Year’s Maximum Pensionable Earnings (YMPE), over the same five consecutive year period and
                       2.0% on the excess, subject to the maximum pension benefit limit allowed under the Income Tax
                       Act (Canada). The maximum pensionable service allowable under the plan is 35 years.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                         111
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 13       Employee Future Benefits (continued)

                   (ii) LAPP Surplus

                        LAPP carried out an actuarial valuation as at December 31, 2018 and these results were then
                        extrapolated to December 31, 2019. The LAPP’s December 31, 2019 net assets available for
                        benefits divided by the LAPP’s pension obligation shows that the LAPP is 119% (2018 – 108%)
                        funded.

                                                                  December 31, 2019            December 31, 2018
                  LAPP net assets available for benefits        $         50,520,461         $         44,468,547
                  LAPP pension obligation                                 42,607,200                   40,999,200
                  LAPP surplus                                  $          7,913,261         $          3,469,347

                        The LAPP net assets available for benefits are subject to significant market volatility due to the
                        economic crisis stemming from the global COVID-19 pandemic. To the extent that the pension
                        plans may not recover market-losses during the remainder of 2020, the funded status of the
                        plans would experience a correlated decline. The financial market impact of the outbreak has
                        been rapidly evolving, which precludes a reasonable estimate of the impact.

                        The 2020 and 2019 LAPP contribution rates are as follows:

                                   Calendar 2020                                        Calendar 2019
                        Employer                Employees                    Employer                Employees
                   9.39% of pensionable   8.39% of pensionable          9.39% of pensionable 8.39% of pensionable
                     earnings up to the      earnings up to the           earnings up to the      earnings up to the
                   YMPE and 13.84% of      YMPE and 12.84% of           YMPE and 13.84% of YMPE and 12.84% of
                        the excess              the excess                   the excess              the excess

              (c) Pension Expense

                                                                                        2020                  2019
                  Local Authorities Pension Plan                               $          547,168     $       556,609
                  Defined contribution pension plans and group RRSPs                       45,029              48,408
                  Supplemental Pension Plan                                                 2,095               2,265
                  Management Employees Pension Plan                                           378                 378
                                                                               $          594,670     $       607,660




112                                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                      Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 14        Unexpended Deferred Operating Revenue

              (a) Changes in the unexpended deferred operating revenue balance are as follows:

                                                                        2020                                      2019
                                                                             Donors and
                                                                 Other
                                                      AH                 (i)    Non-              Total           Total
                                                              Government
                                                                             Government
 Balance, beginning of year                 $         155,302 $     29,579 $     268,338 $         453,219 $       420,245
 Received or receivable during the year,
  net of repayments                               1,262,036          59,538        171,893       1,493,467       1,417,630
 Unexpended deferred operating revenue
   returned                                           (13,061)          (60)        (1,013)        (14,134)         (2,496)
 Restricted investment income                            1,179        1,718         10,231           13,128           9,465
 Transferred from unexpended deferred
  capital revenue(ii)                                   2,265         28,227           1,761         32,253          57,237
 Recognized as revenue                           (1,290,302)        (92,152)      (157,289)     (1,539,743)     (1,434,092)
 Miscellaneous other revenue recognized               (1,333)        (2,384)         (9,848)       (13,565)        (22,463)
                                                     116,086          24,466        284,073         424,625         445,526
 Changes in unrealized net gains
  attributable to portfolio investments
  related to endowments and
  unexpended deferred operating
  revenue                                              (1,025)          553        (18,202)        (18,674)          7,693
 Balance, end of year                       $         115,061 $      25,019 $      265,871 $       405,951 $       453,219

                   (i) The balance at March 31, 2020 for other government includes $1,007 of unexpended deferred

                   operating revenue received from government entities outside the GOA (March 31, 2019 – $506). The
                   remaining balance in other government all relates to the GOA, see Note 21.
                  (ii) The transfer is mainly comprised of restricted capital funding that was used for approved

                   expenditures that did not meet the definition of a tangible capital asset

       (b) The unexpended deferred operating revenue balance at the end of the year is externally restricted for the
           following purposes:

                                                                          2020                                       2019
                                                                             Donors and
                                                                 Other
                                                        AH                      Non-                 Total           Total
                                                               Government
                                                                             Government
 Research and education                           $      8,811 $     2,505 $     165,575 $            176,891 $       182,763
 Physician revenue and alternate
  relationship plans                                     36,375           309               -          36,684            37,070
 Primary Care Networks                                   24,778             -               -          24,778            24,354
 Long term care partnerships                                  -        15,093               -          15,093            18,329
 Promotion, prevention and community                      2,405         1,179             345           3,929            15,777
 Addiction and mental health                             32,951           226           1,950          35,127            31,668
 Support services                                           945           481          61,196          62,622            58,265
 Others less than $10,000                                 8,705         1,688          16,757          27,150            42,642

 Unrealized net gain attributable to portfolio
  investments related to endowments and
  unexpended deferred operating revenue
  (Note 10)                                                  91         3,538          20,048          23,677          42,351
                                                  $     115,061 $      25,019 $       265,871 $       405,951 $       453,219




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                          113
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 15         Unexpended Deferred Capital Revenue

               (a) Changes in the unexpended deferred capital revenue balance are as follows:

                                                                                                                     2019
                                                                          2020
                                                                                                                   (Note 26)
                                                                              Donors and
                                                                  Other
                                                    AH                           Non-              Total            Total
                                                               Government(i)
                                                                              Government
      Balance, beginning of year               $     53,862 $         6,173 $      68,359 $            128,394 $     124,289
      Received or receivable during the year        170,756         118,764        43,266              332,786       349,293
      Unexpended deferred capital revenue
       returned                                      (4,343)              -             (55)           (4,398)           (250)
      Transfer to expended deferred
       capital revenue                             (180,340)       (92,073)         (43,293)      (315,706)         (287,701)
      Transferred to unexpended deferred
       operating revenue(ii)                         (2,265)       (28,227)          (1,761)           (32,253)      (57,237)
      Balance, end of year                     $     37,670 $         4,637 $        66,516 $          108,823 $     128,394

                   (i) The balance at March 31, 2020 for other government all relates to the GOA, see Note 21.
                   (ii)
                     The transfer is mainly comprised of restricted capital funding that was used for approved
                   expenditures that did not meet the definition of a tangible capital asset

               (b) The unexpended deferred capital revenue balance at the end of the year is externally restricted for
                   the following purposes:

                                                                                      2020                       2019
      AH
       Information systems                                                      $          11,118        $           16,712
       Medical Equipment Replacement Upgrade Program                                        1,457                         2
       Diagnostic equipment                                                                18,189                    19,585
       Other equipment                                                                      6,906                    17,563
      Total AH                                                                             37,670                    53,862

      Other government
       Facilities and improvements                                                             4,637                    6,173
      Total other government                                                                   4,637                    6,173

      Donors and non-government
       Equipment                                                                           59,809                    59,849
       Facilities and improvements                                                          6,707                     8,510
      Total donors and non-government                                                      66,516                    68,359
                                                                                $         108,823        $          128,394




114                                                                                     Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                 Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 16       Expended Deferred Capital Revenue

              Changes in the expended deferred capital revenue balance are as follows:

                                                                    2020                          2019
                                                                       Donors and
                                                            Other
                                                  AH                      Non-        Total       Total
                                                         Government(i)
                                                                       Government
     Balance, beginning of year          $       340,429 $ 6,392,303 $     192,386 $ 6,925,118 $ 6,735,454
     Transferred from unexpended
      deferred capital revenue                   180,340         92,073        43,293        315,706          287,701
     Contributed tangible capital assets               -        523,196             -        523,196          285,368
     Less: amounts recognized as
      revenue                                    (61,354)     (308,581)       (34,470)  (404,405)   (383,405)
     Balance, end of year                $       459,415    $ 6,698,991 $     201,209 $ 7,359,615 $ 6,925,118

                  (i) The balance at March 31, 2020 for other government includes $20 of expended deferred capital

                  revenue received from government entities outside the GOA (March 31, 2019 – $36). The remaining
                  balance in other government all relates to the GOA, see Note 21.


Note 17       Debt

                                                                            2020                       2019
             Debentures payable(a):
                Parkade loan #1                                   $                 23,447   $              26,500
                Parkade loan #2                                                     22,984                  25,522
                Parkade loan #3                                                     31,338                  34,048
                Parkade loan #4                                                    124,680                 132,577
                Parkade loan #5                                                     30,388                  32,200
                Parkade loan #6                                                     21,576                  22,557
                Parkade loan #7                                                     47,479                  49,516
                Parkade loan #8                                                    157,000                       -
                Energy savings initiative loan                                      22,336                  24,089
             Other                                                                     323                     633
                                                                  $                481,551   $             347,642

             (a) AHS issued debentures to Alberta Capital Financing Authority (ACFA), a related party, to finance the
                 construction of parkades. AHS has pledged revenue derived directly or indirectly from the operations
                 of all parking facilities being built, renovated, owned, and operated by AHS as security for these
                 debentures.

                  AHS issued a debenture to ACFA relating to an energy savings initiative. AHS has pledged the
                  mortgage on the Royal Alexandra hospital Lands and Alberta Hospital Lands as security for this
                  debenture.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                  115
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 17       Debt (continued)


                  AHS is in compliance with all performance requirements of its debenture loans as at March 31, 2020.

                  The maturity dates and interest rates for the debentures are as follows:

                                                                   Maturity Date               Fixed Interest Rate
             Parkade loan #1                                  September 2026                       4.4025%
             Parkade loan #2                                  September 2027                       4.3870%
             Parkade loan #3                                  March 2029                           4.9150%
             Parkade loan #4                                  September 2031                       4.9250%
             Parkade loan #5                                  June 2032                            4.2280%
             Parkade loan #6                                  December 2035                        3.6090%
             Parkade loan #7                                  March 2038                           2.6400%
             Parkade loan #8                                  December 2059                        3.6010%
             Energy savings initiative loan                   December 2030                        2.4160%
             Other                                            March 2021                           4.6000%

              (b) As at March 31, 2020, AHS holds a $220,000 (March 31, 2019 - $220,000) revolving demand facility
                  with a Canadian chartered bank which may be used for operating purposes. Draws on the facility
                  bear interest at the bank's prime rate less 0.50% per annum. As at March 31, 2020, AHS has $nil
                  (March 31, 2019 - $nil) draws against this facility.

                  AHS also has access to a $33,000 (March 31, 2019 – $33,000) revolving demand letter of credit
                  facility which may be used to secure AHS’ obligations to third parties. At March 31, 2020, AHS has
                  $4,687 (March 31, 2019 – $4,419) in a letter of credit outstanding against this facility. AHS is in
                  compliance with the terms of the agreement relating to the letter of credit, therefore no liability has
                  been recorded.

              (c) AHS is committed to making payments as follows:

               Year Ended March 31            Principal Payments        Interest Payments                Total
                        2021                  $            25,893     $             18,974      $               44,867
                        2022                               26,666                   17,866                      44,532
                        2023                               27,811                   16,721                      44,532
                        2024                               29,008                   15,524                      44,532
                        2025                               30,258                   14,274                      44,532
                      Thereafter                          341,915                  144,874                     486,789
                                              $           481,551     $            228,233      $              709,784

                  During the year, the total interest related to debt was $15,864 (2019 – $15,199).




116                                                                                     Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                        Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 18       Tangible Capital Assets


                                                                                            Disposals/write-
             Cost                      2019          Additions(a)        Transfers                                     2020
                                                                                               downs(b)

  Facilities and improvements      $   9,401,390 $            1,867 $         244,882       $        (2,839) $          9,645,300
  Work in progress                     1,625,941            909,759         (763,719)               (27,293)            1,744,688
  Equipment(c)                         2,561,156            106,152             3,591               (47,283)            2,623,616
  Information systems                  1,474,803             17,073           389,281               (53,358)            1,827,799
  Building service equipment             729,544                  -           110,662                   (84)              840,122
  Land(d)                                116,823                133                 -                   (30)              116,926
  Leased facilities and
                                        229,874              21,695             3,830                    (6)             255,393
   improvements
  Land improvements                      94,188                    -            11,473                  (80)              105,581
                                   $ 16,233,719 $          1,056,679 $               - $           (130,973) $         17,159,425


        Accumulated                                  Amortization         Effect of          Disposals/write-
                                       2019                                                                            2020
        Amortization                                  Expense             Transfers             downs(b)

  Facilities and              $        3,915,175 $           263,455 $                  - $           (2,729) $         4,175,901
   improvements
  Work in progress                             -                   -                    -                   -                   -
  Equipment(c)                         1,933,533             147,466                    -            (46,288)           2,034,711
  Information systems                  1,320,894              77,772                    -            (41,877)           1,356,789
  Building service equipment             434,531              42,533                    -                (84)             476,980
  Land(d)                                      -                   -                    -                   -                   -
  Leased facilities and
                                        179,731                7,308                    -                 (6)            187,033
   improvements
  Land improvements                       68,851               3,280                    -                (80)              72,051
                             $         7,852,715 $           541,814 $                  - $          (91,064) $         8,303,465


                                                                                   Net Book Value
                                                                         2020                                   2019
  Facilities and improvements                          $                          5,469,399 $                           5,486,215
  Work in progress                                                                1,744,688                             1,625,941
  Equipment(c)                                                                      588,905                               627,623
  Information systems                                                               471,010                               153,909
  Building service equipment                                                        363,142                               295,013
  Land(d)                                                                           116,926                               116,823
  Leased facilities and improvements                                                 68,360                                50,143
  Land improvements                                                                  33,530                                25,337
                                                       $                          8,855,960 $                           8,381,004




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                          117
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 18       Tangible Capital Assets (continued)


                                                                                             Disposals/write-
            Cost                        2018           Additions(a)         Transfers                                   2019
                                                                                                downs(b)

  Facilities and
                                $        9,300,463 $                  - $         108,258 $           (7,331)     $      9,401,390
   improvements
  Work in progress                       1,179,069           692,879             (246,007)                  -            1,625,941
  Equipment(c)                           2,512,888           164,704                 (923)          (115,513)            2,561,156
  Information systems                    1,438,547            21,742                46,064           (31,550)            1,474,803
  Building service
                                          648,352                     -            81,747               (555)             729,544
   equipment
  Land(d)                                 116,875                     -                  -               (52)             116,823
  Leased facilities and
                                          229,065                     -               809                    -            229,874
   improvements
  Land improvements                         84,197                 -               10,052                (61)               94,188
                                $       15,509,456 $         879,325 $                  - $         (155,062) $         16,233,719


                                                       Amortization         Effect of        Disposals/write-
  Accumulated Amortization                2018                                                                          2019
                                                        Expense             Transfers            downs

  Facilities and improvements       $    3,666,479 $         255,001 $                   - $          (6,305) $          3,915,175
  Work in progress                               -                 -                     -                  -                    -
  Equipment(c)                           1,898,695           148,701                     -          (113,863)            1,933,533
  Information systems                    1,277,120            75,320                     -           (31,546)            1,320,894
  Building service equipment               398,200            36,884                     -              (553)              434,531
  Land(d)                                        -                 -                     -                  -                    -
  Leased facilities and
                                           172,370             7,361                     -                   -            179,731
   improvements
  Land improvements                         65,285             3,627                     -               (61)              68,851
                                    $    7,478,149 $         526,894 $                   - $        (152,328) $         7,852,715


                                                                                    Net Book Value
                                                                          2019                                   2018
  Facilities and improvements                          $                           5,486,215 $                           5,633,984
  Work in progress                                                                 1,625,941                             1,179,069
  Equipment(c)                                                                       627,623                               614,193
  Information systems                                                                153,909                               161,427
  Building service equipment                                                         295,013                               250,152
  Land(d)                                                                            116,823                               116,875
  Leased facilities and improvements                                                  50,143                                56,695
  Land improvements                                                                   25,337                                18,912
                                                       $                           8,381,004 $                           8,031,307

              (a) Contributed Tangible Capital Assets

                   Additions include total contributed tangible capital assets of $523,196 (2019 – $285,368) consisting
                   of $523,196 from AI (2019 – $285,322) and $nil from other sources (2019 – $46).

              (b) Write-Downs

                   Write-downs include work in progress of $22,615 (2019 - $ nil) related to the cancelled Edmonton
                   Lab Hub project.



118                                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                  Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 18       Tangible Capital Assets (continued)

             (c) Leased Equipment

                  Equipment includes tangible capital assets acquired through capital leases at a cost of $22,884 (2019
                  – $17,240) with accumulated amortization of $12,152 (March 31, 2019 – $12,119). For the year ended
                  March 31, 2020, leased equipment included a net increase of $6,707 related to vehicles under capital
                  leases (2019 – net increase of $4,363).

             (d) Leased Land

                  Land at the following sites has been leased to AHS at nominal values:

                                      Site                             Leased from                Lease Expiry
                   Evansburg Community Health Centre            Yellowhead County             April 2031
                   Jasper Healthcare Centre                     Parks Canada                  January 2034
                   Bethany Care Centre                          Red Deer College              April 2034
                   Myrnam Land                                  Eagle Hill Foundation         May 2038
                   Two Hills Helipad                            Stella Stefiuk                August 2041
                   McConnell Place North                        City of Edmonton              September 2044
                   Northeast Community Health Centre            City of Edmonton              February 2047
                   Foothills Medical Centre Parkade             University of Calgary         July 2054
                   Alberta Children’s Hospital                  University of Calgary         December 2103
                   Kaye Edmonton Clinic (Parcel H)              The University of Alberta     February 2109




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                   119
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
For the year ended March 31, 2020
(thousands of dollars)

Note 19         Accumulated Surplus

                Accumulated surplus is comprised of the following:

                                                                     2020                                                                2019
                                                                                                  Internally
                                                                               Internally         Restricted
                                           Invested in
                                                                              Restricted         Surplus for
                            Unrestricted    Tangible     Endowments
                                                             (b)              Surplus for         Insurance           Total              Total
                              Surplus        Capital
                                                                                 Future             Equity
                                            Assets(a)
                                                                              Purposes(c)       Requirements
                                                                                                     and
                                                                                                Foundations(d)
Balance, beginning
  of year               $        42,108    $ 940,283     $   75,157       $      152,842         $    68,034       $ 1,278,424       $   1,317,055


Annual operating
  deficit                     (145,823)              -                -                     -                  -      (145,823)           (38,631)


Tangible capital
  assets acquired
  with internal
  funds                       (127,589)      151,391                  -          (23,802)                      -                 -                   -

Amortization of
 internally funded
 tangible capital
 assets                         177,318     (177,318)                 -                     -                  -                 -                   -

Principal payments
  on debt                       (23,091)      23,091                  -                     -                  -                 -                   -

Payments on
  obligations under
  capital leases                 (3,204)        3,204                 -                     -                  -                 -                   -

Net receipt of life
  lease deposits                    281         (281)                 -                     -                  -                 -                   -

Transfer of
  internally
  restricted surplus            129,040              -                -         (129,040)                      -                 -                   -

Transfer of
  insurance equity
  requirements and
  foundations
  surpluses                     (14,342)             -                -                     -         14,342                     -                   -

Transfer of
  endowment
  contributions                    (281)             -             281                      -                  -                 -                   -

Balance, end of         $        34,417    $ 940,370     $   75,438       $             -        $    82,376       $ 1,132,601       $   1,278,424
  year




120                                                                                                              Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                     Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 19       Accumulated Surplus (continued)

             (a) Invested in Tangible Capital Assets

                  The accumulated surplus invested in tangible capital assets represents the net book value of tangible
                  capital assets that have previously been purchased with AHS’ unrestricted surplus.

                  Reconciliation of invested in tangible capital assets:

                                                                                 2020                    2019
          Tangible Capital Assets (Note 18)                                $       8,855,960     $         8,381,004
            Less funded by:
              Expended Deferred Capital Revenue (Note 16)                        (7,359,615)              (6,925,118)
              Debt (Note 17)                                                       (481,551)                (347,642)
              Unexpended Debt                                                         42,568                    6,813
              Other funding (i)                                                            -                 (65,000)
              Obligations under capital leases (Note 12b)                          (103,990)                 (97,053)
          Interim  financing
              Life lease     from the
                         deposits     Ministry
                                  (Note 12) of Infrastructure i)                    (13,002)                 (12,721)
                                                                           $         940,370     $            940,283

                  (i)    Other funding comprises in substance, tangible capital assets financing provided to AHS by the
                         Ministry of Infrastructure as accounts payable of $109,150 (2019 - $65,000) (Note 12), offset by
                         unexpended debt proceeds of $109,150 (2019 - $nil) earmarked to settle the liability.

             (b) Endowments

                  Endowments represent the portion of accumulated surplus that is restricted and must be maintained
                  in perpetuity. Transfers of endowment contributions from unrestricted surplus include $281 (2019 -
                  $463) of contributions received in the year (Note 5).

             (c) Internally Restricted Surplus for Future Purposes

                  The restriction of accumulated surplus for AHS’ future operating and capital purposes is as follows:

                  (i)    Ancillary services surplus of $nil (2019 - $112,508) comprising ancillary operation surpluses from
                         parking, retail food services, and controlled entities. Transfers in the year include $23,802 to
                         invested in tangible capital assets representing tangible capital assets acquired with the funds
                         and $88,706 to unrestricted surplus to close the account.

                  (ii)   Other surplus of $nil (2019 - $40,334) comprising surpluses set aside to address funding of
                         expenses for certain initiatives spanning multiple fiscal years. Transfers in the year include
                         $40,334 to unrestricted surplus to close the account.

             (d) Internally Restricted Surplus for Insurance Equity Requirements and Foundations

                  Insurance equity requirements comprise surpluses of $28,237 (2019 - $15,725) related to equity
                  of the LPIP mainly relating to legislative requirements per the Insurance Act. Foundations
                  comprise surpluses amounting to $54,139 (2019 - $52,309) related to donations received by AHS’
                  Controlled Foundations without external restrictions attached.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                        121
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 20        Contractual Obligations and Contingent Liabilities

              (a) Contractual Obligations

                   Contractual obligations are AHS’ obligations to others that will become liabilities in the future when
                   the terms of those contracts or agreements are met.

                   The estimated aggregate amount payable for the unexpired terms of these contractual obligations
                   are as follows:

      Year ended                                               Operating Lease
                          Services(i)         Other(ii)                             Capital Projects         Total(iii)
       March 31                                                  Payments
        2021        $        2,698,884   $        505,868      $         58,184     $       181,085     $     3,444,021
        2022                 1,449,315            273,261                54,595              30,407           1,807,578
        2023                 1,085,695            161,159                47,375                   -           1,294,229
        2024                   927,396             91,475                38,270                   -           1,057,141
        2025                   704,878             50,599                28,935                   -             784,412
      Thereafter             7,296,428             85,456                70,499                   -           7,452,383
                    $       14,162,596   $      1,167,818      $        297,858     $       211,492     $    15,839,764

                    (i)  Service obligations mainly relate to contracts entered into with third parties for the provision of
                         long-term care and home care services.
                    (ii) Other obligations mainly relate to contracts entered into with third parties for maintenance,
                         information technology services, software, equipment, acquisitions, and procurement of
                         medical supplies and food.
                   (iii) In 2019-20, AHS reassessed for disclosure, contractual obligations related to services, other
                         obligations and capital projects. These amounts were not previously reported.

              (b) Contingent Liabilities

                   AHS is subject to legal claims during its normal course of business. AHS records a liability when the
                   assessment of a claim indicates that a future event is likely to confirm that an asset had been impaired
                   or a liability incurred at the date of the financial statements and the amount of the contingent loss can
                   be reasonably estimated.

                   Accruals have been made in specific instances where it is likely that losses will be incurred based on
                   a reasonable estimate. As at March 31, 2020, accruals have been recorded as part of the provision
                   for unpaid claims and other liabilities (Note 12). Included in this accrual are claims in which AHS has
                   been jointly named with the Minister. The accrual provided for these claims under the provision for
                   unpaid claims represents AHS’ portion of the liability.

                   AHS has been named in 262 legal claims (2019 – 225 claims) related to conditions in existence at
                   March 31, 2020 where the likelihood of the occurrence of a future event confirming a contingent loss
                   is not reasonably determinable. Of these, 222 claims have $498,678 in specified amounts and 40
                   have no specified amounts (2019 – 205 claims with $415,883 of specified claims and 20 claims with
                   no specified amounts). The resolution of indeterminable claims may result in a liability, if any, that is
                   different than the claimed amount.




122                                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                      Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 21       Related Parties

              Transactions with related parties are included within these consolidated financial statements, unless
              otherwise stated.

              The Minister appoints all members of the AHS Board. The viability of AHS’ operations depends on
              transfers from AH. Transactions between AHS and AH are reported and disclosed in the Consolidated
              Statement of Operations, the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, and the Notes to the
              Consolidated Financial Statements, and are therefore excluded from the tables below.

              Related parties also include key management personnel of AHS. AHS has defined key management
              personnel to include those disclosed in Sub-Schedule 2A & 2B of these consolidated financial
              statements. Related party transactions with key management personnel primarily consist of
              compensation related payments and are considered to be undertaken on similar terms and conditions to
              those adopted if the entities were dealing at arm’s length.

              AHS is considered to be a related party with those entities consolidated or included on a modified equity
              basis in the GOA consolidated financial statements. Entities consolidated or included on a modified equity
              basis have been grouped with their respective ministry and transactions between AHS and the other
              ministries are recorded at their exchange amount as follows:

                                                     Revenues(a)                                 Expenses
                                                2020             2019                       2020                 2019
  Ministry of Advanced Education(b)      $         56,092  $        57,266           $        191,053  $          184,812
  Ministry of Infrastructure(c)                   343,065          340,892                        222                   1
  Other ministries(d)                              58,326           55,399                     29,794              31,064
  Total for the year                     $        457,483  $       453,557           $        221,069  $          215,877

                                                   Receivable from                               Payable to
                                                2020              2019                      2020                 2019
  Ministry of Advanced Education(b)      $           6,545  $         7,692          $         33,967   $          35,618
  Ministry of Infrastructure(c)                    25,477            50,566                   109,150              65,000
  Other ministries(d)                              12,128             8,483                   488,080             349,886
  Balance, end of year                   $         44,150   $        66,741          $        631,197   $         450,504

                (a) Revenues with GOA ministries include other government transfers of $425,845 (2019 – $420,622),
                    (Note 4), other income of $28,077 (2019 – $30,847), (Note 6), and fees and charges of $3,561
                    (2019 – $2,088).

                (b) Most of AHS transactions with the Ministry of Advanced Education relate to initiatives with the
                    University of Alberta and the University of Calgary. These initiatives include teaching, research, and
                    program delivery. A number of physicians are employed by either AHS or the universities but
                    perform services for both. Due to proximity of locations, some initiatives result in sharing physical
                    space and support services. The revenue and expense transactions are a result of funding provided
                    from one to the other and recoveries of shared costs.

                (c) The transactions with the Ministry of Infrastructure (AI) relate to the construction and funding of
                    tangible capital assets. These transactions include operating transfers of $35,271 (2019 – $58,957)
                    and recognition of expended deferred capital revenue of $307,794 (2019 – $281,935) relating to
                    tangible capital assets with stipulations or external restrictions to utilize over their remaining useful
                    lives. Not included in the table above but included in total amounts disclosed in Note 18(a) is the
                    transfer of land and other tangible capital assets from AI of $523,196 (2019 – $285,322).




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                         123
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 21       Related Parties (continued)

                (d) The payable transactions with other ministries include the debt payable to ACFA (Note 17(a)).

              At March 31, 2020, AHS has recorded deferred revenue from other ministries within the GOA, excluding
              AH, of $24,012 (March 31, 2019 – $29,073) related to unexpended deferred operating revenue (Note
              14), $4,637 (March 31, 2019 – $6,173) related to unexpended deferred capital revenue (Note 15) and
              $6,698,971 (March 31, 2019 – $6,392,267) related to expended deferred capital revenue (Note 16).

              Contingent liabilities in which AHS has been jointly named with other government entities within the
              GOA are disclosed in Note 20.


Note 22       Government Partnerships

              AHS has proportionately consolidated 50% of the results of the PCNs and NACTRC and 33.33% of the
              results in iRSM. The following is 100% of the financial position and results of operations for AHS’
              government partnerships.

                                                                            2020                       2019
  Financial assets (portfolio investments, accounts
                                                                   $                74,273    $               72,548
  receivable, other assets)
  Liabilities (trade accounts payable, unexpended deferred
                                                                                    74,273                    72,548
  operating revenue)
  Accumulated surplus                                              $                      -   $                      -

  Total revenues                                                   $               260,975    $            248,538
  Total expenses                                                                   260,975                 248,538
  Annual surplus                                                   $                     -    $                  -


Note 23       Trusts under Administration

              (a) Health Benefit Trust of Alberta (HBTA)

                  AHS is one of more than 30 participants in the HBTA and has a majority of representation on the HBTA
                  governance board. The HBTA is a formal health and welfare trust established under a Trust Agreement
                  effective January 1, 2000. The HBTA provides health and other related employee benefits pursuant to
                  the authorizing Trust Agreement.

                  HBTA’s balances as at March 31 are as follows:

                                                                            2020                       2019
 Financial assets                                                  $               128,181    $            155,705
 Liabilities                                                                        17,486                  16,401
 Net financial assets                                              $               110,695    $            139,304

 Non-financial assets                                                                    4                       3
 Net assets                                                        $               110,699    $            139,307

                  AHS has included in prepaid expenses $74,828 (2019 – $93,784) representing in substance a
                  prepayment of future premiums to HBTA. For the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, AHS paid
                  premiums of $407,512 (2019 – $391,734) which is approximately 98% (2019 – 98%) of the total
                  premiums received by HBTA.



124                                                                                   Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                  Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 23       Trusts under Administration (continued)

             (b) Other Trust Funds

                  AHS receives funds in trust for research and development, education, and other programs. These
                  amounts are held and administered on behalf of others in accordance with the terms and conditions
                  embodied in the relevant agreements with no unilateral power to appropriate the funds or to change
                  the conditions set out in the trust indenture (or agreement) and therefore are not reported in these
                  consolidated financial statements. As at March 31, 2020, the balance of funds held in trust by AHS for
                  research and development is $100 (March 31, 2019 – $100).

                  AHS receives funds in trust from continuing care residents for personal expenses. As at March 31,
                  2020, the balance of these funds is $1,390 (March 31, 2019 – $1,452). These amounts are not
                  included in the consolidated financial statements.

                  AHS and a third party trustee administer the SERP in accordance with a retirement compensation
                  arrangement trust agreement. As at March 31, 2020, there are $29,181 in plan assets (March 31,
                  2019 - $32,674). These amounts are not included in the consolidated financial statements


Note 24       Segment Disclosure

              The Consolidated Schedule of Segment Disclosures – Schedule 3 is intended to enable users to better
              understand the reporting entity and identify the resources allocated to the major activities of AHS.

              AHS’ revenues, as reported on the Consolidated Statement of Operations, are most informatively
              presented by source and are not reasonably assignable to the reportable segments. For each reported
              segment, the expenses are directly or reasonably attributable to the segment.

              The segments have been selected based on the presentation that is adopted for the financial reporting,
              planning and budget processes, and represent the major distinguishable activities of AHS.

              Segments include:

             (a) Continuing care

                 Continuing care is comprised of long-term care including chronic and psychiatric care in facilities
                 operated by AHS and contracted providers.

             (b) Community care

                 Community care includes supportive living, palliative and hospice care, and community programs
                 including Primary Care Networks, Family Care Clinics, urgent care centres, and community mental
                 health. This segment excludes community-based dialysis, oncology, and surgical services.

             (c) Home care

                 Home care is comprised of home nursing and support.

             (d) Acute care

                 Acute care is comprised predominantly of patient care units such as medical, surgical, intensive care,
                 obstetrics, pediatrics, mental health, emergency, day/night care, clinics, day surgery, and contracted
                 surgical services. This segment also includes operating and recovery rooms.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                   125
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 24       Segment Disclosure (continued)

              (e) Ambulance services

                 Ambulance services is comprised of ground ambulance, air ambulance, patient transport, and
                 Emergency Medical Services (EMS) central dispatch. AHS also supports community paramedic
                 programs, as well as other programs that support the learning, development, quality and safety of
                 EMS professionals.

              (f) Diagnostic and therapeutic services

                 Diagnostic and therapeutic services support and provide care for patients through clinical lab (both in
                 the community and acute settings), diagnostic imaging, pharmacy, acute and therapeutic services
                 such as physiotherapy, occupational therapy, respiratory therapy, and speech language pathology.

              (g) Population and public health

                 Population and public health is comprised primarily of health promotion, disease and injury prevention,
                 and health protection.

              (h) Research and education

                 Research and education is comprised primarily of costs pertaining to formally organized health
                 research and graduate medical education, primarily funded by donations, and third party contributions.

              (i) Information technology

                 Information technology is comprised of costs pertaining to the provision of services to design, develop,
                 implement, and maintain effective and efficient management support systems in the areas of data
                 processing, systems engineering, technical support, and systems research and development.

              (j) Support services

                 Support services is comprised of building maintenance operations (including utilities), materials
                 management (including purchasing, central warehousing, distribution and sterilization),
                 housekeeping, patient registration, health records, food services, and emergency preparedness.

              (k) Administration

                 Administration is comprised of human resources, finance, communications and general
                 administration, as well as a share of administration of certain contracted health service providers.
                 General administration includes senior executives and many functions such as planning and
                 development, infection control, quality assurance, patient safety, insurance, privacy, risk
                 management, internal audit, and legal.




126                                                                                     Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                     Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 25       Impact of COVID-19

              The World Health Organization assessed the novel strain of coronavirus, COVID-19, a global pandemic and
              recommended containment measures worldwide. On March 17, 2020, a state of public health emergency
              was declared in Alberta.

              In response to the global pandemic, AH provided AHS with $23,317 in funding up to March 31, 2020. These
              funds were used for incremental expenditures arising from testing, surveillance and treatment of patients.
              Assessment and treatment centers were also set up to assist with the anticipated demand of COVID-19
              related healthcare services. Expenditures were also incurred for hospital supplies and equipment, including
              personal protective equipment.

              Subsequent to March 31, 2020, AHS has received additional funding from AH to assist in the continued
              response to COVID-19. To date, the following impacts of the pandemic have been identified:

                      Additional measures relating to the provision of personal protective equipment for the overall safety
                       of Albertans. This has entailed the entering into of significant purchase commitments, including
                       payment of deposits to secure essential supplies and equipment for both AHS and third party health
                       service providers within Alberta. At the direction of the Minister, AHS also acquired personal
                       protective equipment to provide to other provinces.
                      Delays or deferrals of certain health care related services
                      Increases in funding provided to third party service providers, especially long term care providers
                       which have been significantly impacted by COVID-19
                      Operation of assessment and treatment centers as well as increased laboratory testing relating to
                       COVID-19
                      Redeployment of parts of the AHS workforce as the organization responds to measures such as
                       contact tracing and testing, remote solutions such as virtual health and health link support.
                      Delays in the implementation of certain information systems initiatives
                      Delays in negotiations and settlement of open contracts relating to the AHS labor workforce
                      Potential declines in the value of marketable securities held by AHS as described in Note 9
                      Increased uncertainty relating to recoverability of outstanding accounts receivable balances
                      Temporary suspension of parking fees
                      Receipt of donated ventilators, supplies and personal protective equipment as Albertans come
                       together to assist in the response to COVID-19

              As Alberta progresses through the first wave of COVID-19, AHS continues to closely monitor the COVID-19
              developments. Overall, as the response is ongoing and an end to the pandemic is indeterminable, the
              related financial and operational impacts of the pandemic cannot be reliably estimated at this time.


Note 26       Corresponding Amounts

              In the current year, AHS determined that certain immaterial donor contributions related to the purchase of
              equipment had been recorded before the contributions were authorized by the donor. As a result, AHS has
              retrospectively adjusted certain consolidated financial statement accounts as at and for the year ended March
              31, 2019 including accounts receivable and unexpended deferred capital revenue which have been reduced
              by $78,485 to more appropriately reflect the timing of the donor authorizations.

              Certain other corresponding amounts have been reclassified to conform to the 2020 consolidated financial
              statement presentation.


Note 27       Approval of Consolidated Financial Statements

              The consolidated financial statements were approved by the AHS Board on June 24, 2020.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                        127
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Schedule 1 – Consolidated Schedule of Expenses by Object
For the year ended March 31, 2020
(thousands of dollars)


                                                                     2020                                 2019
                                                         Budget                 Actual                   Actual
                                                         (Note 3)

 Salaries and benefits (Schedule 2)                  $   8,327,000          $      8,530,683         $      8,321,637
 Contracts with health service providers                 2,781,000                 2,823,741                2,749,686
 Contracts under the Health Care Protection Act             20,000                    20,041                   17,186
 Drugs and gases                                           501,000                   560,661                  506,662
 Medical supplies                                          588,000                   581,490                  592,517
 Other contracted services                               1,378,000                 1,319,640                1,322,806
 Other(a)                                                1,216,000                 1,196,379                1,273,213
 Amortization and loss on disposals/write-downs of
  tangible capital assets (Note 18)                       554,000                    581,723                  529,628
                                                     $ 15,365,000           $     15,614,358         $     15,313,335

 (a) Significant amounts included in Other are:
   Equipment expense                                 $     203,000          $       223,174          $        212,312
   Building rent                                           121,000                  126,387                   112,921
   Utilities                                               109,000                  115,577                   118,372
   Housekeeping, laundry and linen, plant
      maintenance and biomedical engineering
      supplies                                              88,000                    86,877                   90,608
   Building and ground expenses                            126,000                    85,683                  118,206
   Food and dietary supplies                                81,000                    80,855                   80,827
   Office supplies                                          53,000                    60,311                   63,279
   Fundraising and grants awarded                           54,000                    52,298                   51,336
   Minor equipment purchases                                56,000                    51,922                   59,246
   Insurance and liability claims                           46,000                    42,439                   90,867
   Telecommunications                                       39,000                    39,983                   38,917
   Travel                                                   54,000                    39,809                   45,423
   Licenses, fees and memberships                           18,000                    21,650                   17,211
   Education                                                18,000                    11,893                   12,428
   Other                                                   150,000                   157,521                  161,260
                                                     $   1,216,000          $      1,196,379         $      1,273,213




128                                                                                 Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                                                         Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Schedule 2 – Consolidated Schedule of Salaries and Benefits
 For the year ended March 31, 2020
 (thousands of dollars)


                                                                             2020                                                                      2019

                                                         Other
                                                                                                     Severance (e)
                                                                 Other Non-
                                    Base Salary          Cash
                        FTE (a)           (b)                       Cash           Subtotal      Number of                     Total         FTE (a)          Total
                                                        Benefits                                                 Amount
                                                           (c)   Benefits (d)                    Individuals


Total Board (Sub-
 Schedule 2A)               10.87 $                 -$        336 $           -$          336              - $            -$           336      10.82 $               334
Total Executive (Sub-
 Schedule 2B)               13.95               5,234          58          843          6,135              1         557           6,692        14.00            6,028
Management
 Reporting to CEO
 Direct Reports             56.46          13,452             345        2,420         16,217              -              -      16,217         56.86           15,797
Other Management         3,120.38        372,487            5,207       81,279        458,973            30         3,504       462,477       3,031.59         452,716
Medical Doctors not
 included above(f)         115.97          36,690             472        3,382         40,544              -              -      40,544        141.84           49,934
Regulated nurses not
 included above:
 RNs, Reg. Psych.
 Nurses, Grad
 Nurses                 19,930.49       1,906,924         272,159      415,656       2,594,739             7         542       2,595,281     19,566.39        2,544,809
 LPNs                    5,432.11        358,937           46,374       79,747        485,058              2           86       485,144       5,233.39         464,883
Other health
 technical and
 professional           16,557.82       1,530,576          89,423      342,227       1,962,226           11          413       1,962,639     16,948.48        1,963,001
Unregulated health
 service providers      10,142.83        524,456           61,394      126,612        712,462              5           59       712,521       9,310.80         638,452
Other staff             27,672.17       1,758,794         104,964      382,326       2,246,084           70         3,187      2,249,271     27,251.74        2,186,104


Sub-total               83,053.05       6,507,550         580,732     1,434,492     8,522,774           126         8,348      8,531,122     81,565.91     8,322,058
Less amounts
 included in Other
 contracted services                            (360)         (2)          (77)          (439)             -              -        (439)                          (421)


Total                               $   6,507,190 $       580,730 $ 1,434,415 $     8,522,335           126 $       8,348 $    8,530,683                 $ 8,321,637


This schedule does not include $29,799 in capitalized salaries and benefits (2019 - $27,393).

The accompanying footnotes and sub-schedules are part of this schedule.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                                                                   129
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Sub-Schedule 2A – Board Remuneration
For the year ended March 31, 2020
(thousands of dollars)
                                                                                                           2020               2019
                                                     Term                     2020 Committees           Remuneration       Remuneration

 Board Chairs(g)
 Linda Hughes                              Nov 27, 2015 to Aug 19,      ARC, CEC, FC, GC, HRC,          $            26    $            69
                                           2019                         QSC
 David Weyant                              Since Aug 20, 2019           ARC, CEC, FC, GC, HRC,                       43                   -
                                                                        QSC

 Board Members
 Dr. Brenda Hemmelgarn (Vice Chair)        Since Nov 27, 2015           CEC (Chair), HRC, QSC                        49                 49
 David Carpenter                           Since Nov 27, 2015           ARC (Chair), FC (Chair),
                                                                        HRC                                          34                 35
 Heather Crowshoe                          Nov 3, 2016 to Nov 2,        CEC, GC                                      17                 30
                                           2019
 Richard Dicerni                           Since Nov 27, 2015           CEC, FC, HRC (Chair)                         28                 27
 Robb Foote                                Apr 12, 2018 to Feb 1,       -                                             -                 24
                                           2019
 Linda Hughes                              Aug 20, 2019 to Sep 30,      -                                             1                   -
                                           2019
 Stephen Mandel                            Since Sep 25, 2019           CEC, FC, QSC                                 16                  -
 Heidi Overguard                           Since Sep 25, 2019           CEC, FC, GC, HRC                             17                  -
 Hugh Sommerville                          Since Nov 27, 2015           ARC, GC (Chair)                              32                 31
 Marliss Taylor                            Nov 27, 2015 to Oct 24,      GC, HRC (Chair), QSC                         18                 34
                                           2019
 Brian Vaasjo                              Since Aug 20, 2019           ARC, FC, GC                                  19                  -
 Glenda Yeates                             Since Nov 27, 2015           ARC, FC, QSC (Chair)                         32                 31

 Board Committee Participants(h)
 Dr. Brian Postl                           Since Jan 1, 2018            QSC                                           2                  2
 Gord Winkel                               Since Nov 27, 2015           QSC                                           2                  2

 Total Board                                                                                            $           336    $           334

Board members were remunerated with monthly honoraria. In addition, they received remuneration for attendance at Board and committee
meetings.

Board committees were established by the Board to assist in governing AHS and overseeing the management of AHS’ business and affairs. Board
committee participants are eligible to receive remuneration for meetings attended, and in addition Board committee chairs also receive a monthly
honorarium.

Committee legend: ARC = Audit and Risk Committee, CEC = Community Engagement Committee, FC = Finance Committee, GC = Governance
Committee, HRC = Human Resources Committee, QSC = Quality and Safety Committee




130                                                                                                   Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                                            Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Sub-Schedule 2B – Executive Salaries and Benefits
 For the year ended March 31, 2020
 (thousands of dollars)
                                                                                                      2020
                                                                                     Other      Other Non-
                                                                        Base                                                Severance
               For the Current Fiscal Year                    FTE (a)                Cash         Cash          Subtotal                      Total
                                                                      Salary (b,i)                                              (e)
                                                                                   Benefits (c) Benefits (d)
Board Direct Reports
Andrea Beckwith-Ferraton – Chief Ethics and
 Compliance Officer(q)                                          1.00 $        212 $          3$          37 $         252 $             - $       252
Ronda White – Chief Audit Executive(q)                          1.00          278            1           56           335               -         335
Dr. Verna Yiu – President and Chief Executive Officer(j,r)      1.00          576            -           78           654               -         654

CEO Direct Reports
Dr. Francois Belanger – VP, Quality and Chief Medical
 Officer(q)                                                     1.00          465            -           88           553               -         553
Dr. Ted Braun – VP and Medical Director, Clinical
 Operations(q)                                                  1.00          399            -           61           460               -         460
Mauro Chies – VP, CancerControl Alberta and Clinical
 Support Services(q)                                            1.00          331            -           55           386               -         386
Sean Chilton – VP, Health Professions and Practice and
 Information Technology(k,q)                                    1.00          331            -           64           395               -         395
Todd Gilchrist – VP, People(l,q)                                1.00          452            1           72           525               -         525
Deb Gordon – VP and Chief Operations Officer, Clinical
 Operations(q)                                                  1.00          372            -           65           437               -         437
Robert Hawes – Interim VP, Corporate Services and
  Chief Financial Officer(m,s)                                  0.08           34            3             2           39               -             39
Brenda Huband – VP and Chief Health Operations
  Officer, Central and Southern Alberta(n)                      0.95          353            -           57           410               -         410
Dr. Mark Joffe – VP and Medical Director, CancerControl
 Alberta, Clinical Support Services and Provincial Clinical
 Excellence(o,t)                                                1.00          451          34            42           527               -         527
Deborah Rhodes – VP, Corporate Services and Chief
 Financial Officer(p,u)                                         0.92          357            1           51           409             557         966
Dr. Kathryn Todd – VP, Provincial Clinical Excellence(o,t)      1.00          291          15            45           351               -         351
Colleen Turner – VP, Community Engagement and
 Communications(q)                                              1.00          332            -           70           402               -         402



Total Executive                                                13.95 $      5,234 $        58 $         843 $       6,135 $           557 $     6,692




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                                                 131
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Sub-Schedule 2B – Executive Salaries and Benefits
For the year ended March 31, 2020 (continued)
(thousands of dollars)



                                                                                                 2019
                                                                               Other      Other Non-
                                                                  Base                                                Severance
              For the Prior Fiscal Year                 FTE (a)        (b,i)   Cash         Cash          Subtotal       (e)          Total
                                                                Salary
                                                                             Benefits (c) Benefits (d)
Board Direct Reports
Andrea Beckwith-Ferraton – Chief Ethics and
 Compliance Officer                                       1.00 $        211 $          3$          34 $         248 $          - $            248
Ronda White – Chief Audit Executive                       1.00          276            2           43           321               -           321
Dr. Verna Yiu – President and Chief Executive Officer     1.00          572            -           84           656               -           656

CEO Direct Reports
Dr. Francois Belanger – VP, Quality and Chief Medical
 Officer                                                  1.00          462            -           62           524               -           524
Dr. Ted Braun – VP and Medical Director, Central and
 Southern Alberta                                         1.00          395            -           71           466               -           466
Mauro Chies – VP, CancerControl Alberta and Clinical
 Support Services                                         0.52          171            -           28           199               -           199
Sean Chilton – VP, Health Professions and Practice        1.00          329            -           55           384               -           384
Todd Gilchrist – VP, People, Legal and Privacy            1.00          448            1           62           511               -           511
Deb Gordon – VP and Chief Health Operations Officer,
 Northern Alberta                                         1.00          369            -           83           452               -           452
Karen Horon – Interim VP, Clinical Support Services       0.48          110            -           19           129               -           129
Brenda Huband – VP and Chief Health Operations
 Officer, Central and Southern Alberta                    1.00          369            -           62           431               -           431
Dr. Mark Joffe – VP and Medical Director, Northern
 Alberta                                                  1.00          447          35            41           523               -           523
Deborah Rhodes – VP, Corporate Services and Chief
 Financial Officer                                        1.00          388            1           54           443               -           443
Dr. Kathryn Todd – VP, System Innovations and
 Programs                                                 1.00          289          15            43           347               -           347
Colleen Turner – VP, Community Engagement and
 Communications                                           1.00          329            -           65           394               -           394


Total Executive                                          14.00 $      5,165 $        57 $         806 $       6,028 $          -$        6,028




132                                                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                                                         Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Sub-Schedule 2C – Executive Supplemental Pension Plan and
Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan
(thousands of dollars)
Certain employees will receive retirement benefits that supplement the benefits limited under the registered plans for service. The Supplemental
Pension Plan (SPP) is a defined contribution plan and the Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan (SERP) is a defined benefit plan. The SERP
is disclosed in Note 2(h)(i). The amounts in this table represent the total SPP and SERP benefits earned by the individual during the fiscal year.
The current period benefit costs for SPP and the other costs for SERP included in other non-cash benefits disclosed in Sub-Schedule 2B are
prorated for the period of time the individual was in their position directly reporting to the Board or directly reporting to the President and Chief
Executive Officer. Only individuals holding a position directly reporting to the Board or President and Chief Executive Officer during the current
fiscal year are disclosed.
                                                                   2020                     2019
                                                        SPP        SERP
                                                    Current                                             Account Balance(3) or                     Account Balance(3) or
                                                                                                                                  Change
                                                    Period          Other                                 Accrued Benefit                           Accrued Benefit
                                                                               Total        Total                                During the
                                                    Benefit        Costs(2)                                 Obligation                                Obligation
                                                                                                                                   Year(4)
                                                    Costs(1)                                              March 31, 2019                            March 31, 2020

Andrea Beckwith-Ferraton - Chief Ethics and
 Compliance Officer                                 $         6$          -$           6$           6$                    17 $            8$                         25
Dr. Francois Belanger - VP, Quality and Chief
 Medical Officer                                          36              -        36           36                       239             87                         326
Dr. Ted Braun - VP and Medical Director, Clinical
Operations
       SERP                                                    -          -            -            5                    220            (14)                        206
       SPP                                                28              -        28           28                       140             49                         189
Mauro Chies - VP, CancerControl Alberta and
 Clinical Support Services                                20              -        20           18                       102             36                         138
Sean Chilton - VP, Health Professions and
 Practice and Information Technology                      20              -        20           20                       156             42                         198
Todd Gilchrist - VP, People                               34              -        34           34                       132             59                         191
Deb Gordon - VP and Chief Operations Officer,
 Clinical Operations
       SERP                                                    -        (1)       (1)           15                       683            (41)                        642
       SPP                                                25              -        25           25                       165             54                         219
Robert Hawes - Interim VP, Corporate Services
 and Chief Financial Officer                                   -          -            -            -                       -                 -                           -
Brenda Huband - VP and Chief Health Operations
 Officer, Central and Southern Alberta
       SERP                                                    -        (1)       (1)               9                    400            (33)                        367
       SPP                                                25              -        25           25                       174             52                         226
Dr. Mark Joffe - VP and Medical Director,
 CancerControl Alberta, Clinical Support Services
 and Provincial Clinical Excellence(o)                         -          -            -            -                       -                 -                           -
Deborah Rhodes - VP, Corporate Services and
 Chief Financial Officer(u)                               25              -        25           27                       229          (229)                               -
Dr. Kathryn Todd - VP, Provincial Clinical
 Excellence(o)                                                 -          -            -            -                       -                 -                           -
Colleen Turner - VP, Community Engagement
 and Communications                                       20              -        20           20                       108             42                         150
Ronda White - Chief Audit Executive                       13              -        13           14                        90             28                         118
Dr. Verna Yiu - President and Chief Executive
 Officer                                                  49              -        49           49                       137             66                         203
 (1)    The SPP current period benefit costs are AHS contributions earned in the period.
 (2)    Other SERP costs include retirement benefits, interest expense on the obligations, and amortization of actuarial gains and losses, offset
        by the expected return on the plans’ assets. AHS uses the straight line method to amortize actuarial gains and losses over the expected
        average remaining service life of the plan members.
 (3)    The account balance represents the total cumulative earned contributions to the SPP as well as cumulative investment gains or losses on
        the contributions.
 (4)    Changes in the accrued benefit obligation include current period benefit cost, interest accruing on the obligations and the amortization of
        any actuarial gains or losses in the period. Changes in the account balance include the current benefit costs and investment gains or
        losses related to the account.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                                                                  133
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services
Footnotes to the consolidated Schedule of Salaries and Benefits

 For the year ended March 31, 2020
         Definitions
          a. For this schedule, full time equivalents (FTE) are determined by actual hours earned divided by 2,030.50 annual base hours.
               FTE for the Board and Board committee members are prorated using the number of days in the fiscal year between either the
               date of appointment and the end of the year, the date of appointment and the termination date, or the beginning of the year
               and the termination date.

          b.   Base salary is regular salary and includes all payments earned related to actual hours earned other than those reported as
               other cash benefits.

               Vacation accruals are included in base salary except for direct reports of the Board or President and Chief Executive Officer
               whose vacation accruals are included in other non-cash benefits.

          c.   Other cash benefits include, as applicable, honoraria, overtime, acting pay, membership fees, travel and automobile
               allowances, lump sum payments and an allowance for professional development. Relocation expenses are excluded from
               compensation disclosure as they are considered to be recruiting costs to AHS and not part of compensation unless related to
               severance. Expense reimbursements are also excluded from compensation disclosure except where the expenses meet the
               definition of the other cash benefits listed above.

          d.   Other non-cash benefits include:
                     Employer’s current period benefit costs and other costs of supplemental pension plan and supplemental executive
                      retirement plans as defined in Sub-Schedule 2C
                     Employer’s share of employee benefit contributions and payments made on behalf of employees including pension,
                      health care, dental and vision coverage, out-of-country medical benefits, group life insurance, accidental disability and
                      dismemberment insurance, and long and short-term disability plans
                     Vacation accruals for direct reports of the Board or President and Chief Executive Officer, and
                     Employer’s share of the cost of additional benefits including sabbaticals or other special leave with pay.

          e.   Severance includes direct or indirect payments to individuals upon termination which are not included in other cash benefits or
               other non-cash benefits.

          f.   Compensation provided by AHS for medical doctors included in salaries and benefits expense includes medical doctors paid
               through AHS payroll. The compensation provided by AHS for the remaining medical doctors is included in other contracted
               services.

         Board and Board Committee Participants

          g.   The Board Chair is an Ex-Officio member on all committees.

          h.   These individuals were participants of Board committees, but are not Board members or AHS employees.

         Executive

          i.   Base salary reported for executives are the actual payments earned during the year, and is therefore contingent on the number
               of AHS’ work days in the year. For the year ended March 31, 2020, the number of work days at AHS is 262 (2019 – 260 work
               days).

          j.   The incumbent is engaged in an employment agreement with AHS while on leave of absence from the University of Alberta.
               The contract term ends June 2, 2021.

          k.   The incumbent received a vacation payout of $16 during the year for unused accrued vacation earned in prior periods; accrued
               vacation has been recorded in their compensation as a non-cash benefit in the period it was earned.

          l.   The incumbent received a vacation payout of $9 during the year for unused accrued vacation earned in prior periods; accrued
               vacation has been recorded in their compensation as a non-cash benefit in the period it was earned.

          m. The incumbent was appointed to the temporary position effective March 2, 2020. The term ends July 8, 2020.

          n.   As a result of restructuring, the incumbent ceased to be a direct report to the President and Chief Executive Officer effective
               March 16, 2020.

          o.   The incumbent is on secondment from the University of Alberta. The incumbent’s total remuneration is comprised of salary
               amounts from both AHS and the University of Alberta, and AHS reimburses the University for the incumbent’s base salary and
               benefits. In lieu of enrollment into the AHS SPP, the incumbent will receive an annual lump sum supplemental payment
               equivalent to the amount the incumbent would have received as a member of the SPP and payable from AHS. The lump sum
               has been included in Other Cash Benefits.




134                                                                                                    Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                                   Financial Information



Alberta Health Services
Footnotes to the consolidated Schedule of Salaries and Benefits (Continued)

 For the year ended March 31, 2020

          p.   The incumbent held the position until February 28, 2020 at which time the incumbent left AHS. The incumbent received salary
               and other accrued entitlements to the date of departure. The reported severance included 65 weeks base salary at the rate in
               effect at the date of departure, and 15% of the severance in lieu of benefits. AHS will also make payments for the incumbent
               to attend an outplacement program for a maximum of five months. In addition, the incumbent received a vacation payout of
               $46 for unused accrued vacation at the time of departure; accrued vacation has been recorded in their compensation as a non-
               cash benefit in the period it was earned.

         Termination Obligations

          q.   The incumbent’s termination benefits have not been predetermined.

          r.   In the case of termination without just cause by AHS, the incumbent shall receive severance pay equal to one month base
               salary for each completed month of service during the first year of the term or, after completion of one year of service of the
               term, 12 months base salary.

          s.   There is no severance associated with the temporary position.

          t.   There is no severance associated with the secondment agreement. Upon termination of the secondment agreement, the
               incumbent would return to the incumbent’s regular position at the University of Alberta.

          u.   Based on the provision of the applicable SPP, the following outlines the benefits received by individuals who terminated
               employment with AHS within the 2019-20 fiscal period. As a result of retirement or termination, the incumbents are entitled to
               the benefits accrued to them up to the date of retirement or termination. For participants of SPP, the benefit includes the
               account balances as at March 31, 2019 and the current period benefit costs and investment gains or losses related to the
               account that were incurred during the current year. The AHS obligations are paid through either a lump sum payment or regular
               instalments:


                                               Supplemental Plan             Benefit
                        Position                                                                    Frequency             Payment Terms
                                              Commencement Date        (not in thousands)

                VP, Corporate Services
                                                 June 1, 2010                  $288,935                Once                      June 2020
                and Chief Financial Officer




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                                        135
Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Schedule 3 – Consolidated Schedule of Segment Disclosures
For the year ended March 31, 2020
(thousands of dollars)

                                                                             2020
                                                                                                                    Amortization
                                             Contracts                                                              and loss on
                              Contracts under the
                                                                                           Other                     disposals/
                 Salaries and with health   Health       Drugs and       Medical
                                             Care
                                                                                         contracted     Other       write-downs     Total
                   benefits    service                     gases         supplies
                                          Protection                                      services                   of tangible
                              providers
                                               Act                                                                     capital
                                                                                                                       assets
Continuing
 care            $    321,315 $   806,123 $          - $      7,881 $         4,533 $         5,802 $      28,489 $       2,324 $   1,176,467

Community
 care                 698,728     698,918            -        4,445           3,451          52,003        67,693           551     1,525,789

Home care             338,742     257,699            -         187            9,308          88,298        22,244            84      716,562

Acute care           3,022,568    388,383      20,041       511,365         356,465         562,803       148,107        56,075     5,065,807
Ambulance
 services             305,282     173,494            -        2,018           3,945           1,472        27,322        17,129      530,662

Diagnostic
 and
 therapeutic
 services            1,595,207    289,472            -       24,473         188,168         286,529       106,626        49,091     2,539,566
Population
 and public
 health               305,676      14,620            -        7,704           4,809          10,225        13,825           258      357,117
Research
  and
  education           189,530        3,495           -         103            1,364         124,776        25,217           149      344,634
Information
  technology          298,101          735           -               -              29       40,667       166,852        90,621      597,005
Support                                                                                                                               2,287,2
 services            1,102,401    152,542            -        2,481           9,167         115,228       541,106       364,280           05

Administration        353,133      38,260            -               4          251          31,837        48,898         1,161      473,544

Total            $ 8,530,683 $ 2,823,741 $ 20,041 $         560,661 $       581,490 $ 1,319,640 $       1,196,379 $     581,723 $ 15,614,358




136                                                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                                       Financial Information



Alberta Health Services

Schedule 3 – Consolidated Schedule of Segment Disclosures
(Continued)
For the year ended March 31, 2020
(thousands of dollars)
                                                                               2019
                                                                                                                    Amortization
                                              Contracts                  Medical                                    and loss on
                                 Contracts
                     Salaries                 under the                  supplies         Other                      disposals/
                                 with health             Drugs and
                       and                   Health Care                                contracted      Other       write-downs       Total
                                  service                  gases
                     benefits                Protection                                  services                    of tangible
                                 providers
                                                 Act                                                                   capital
                                                                                                                       assets
Continuing
 care            $     317,473 $     775,491 $        - $     7,600 $         4,664 $         5,278 $      24,705 $         2,152 $    1,137,363
Community
 care                  682,532       657,092                  3,562           4,556          31,951        65,218             372      1,445,283

Home care              327,974       246,052          -        179            7,910          83,441        22,591             148       688,295

Acute care           2,994,658       394,435     17,186     461,210         366,996         569,378       149,794          64,810      5,018,467
Ambulance
 services              299,635       174,932          -       1,953           4,094           1,572        28,690          17,169       528,045
Diagnostic and
 therapeutic
 services            1,563,230       293,708          -      22,738         187,983         291,808       101,463          44,688      2,505,618
Population and
 public health         301,511         9,860          -       6,840           4,403          14,836        11,904             315       349,669
Research and
 education             186,172         2,911          -         15            1,171         129,589        27,216             165       347,239
Information
  technology           240,922          514           -              -          32           37,156       152,109          76,593       507,326
Support
 services            1,070,420       154,714          -       2,560          10,237         112,198       587,269         323,023      2,260,421

Administration         337,110        39,977          -          5             471           45,599       102,254             193       525,609

Total            $ 8,321,637 $ 2,749,686 $       17,186 $ 506,662 $        592,517 $      1,322,806 $    1,273,213 $      529,628 $   15,313,335




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                                              137
Financial Information




138                     Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                                                      Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta


Financial Statements
Table of Contents

         Management’s Responsibility for Financial Reporting ........................................................140

         Independent Auditor’s Report .......................................................................................................141

         Statement of Operations ...................................................................................................................143

         Statement of Financial Position .....................................................................................................144

         Statement of Change in Net Financial Assets ...........................................................................145

         Statement of Cash Flows ...................................................................................................................146

         Notes to the Financial Statements ................................................................................................147

         Schedule 1 – Expenses – Detailed By Object.............................................................................156

         Schedule 2 – Salary and Benefits Disclosures ..........................................................................157

         Schedule 3 – Related Party Transactions...................................................................................158




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                                                          139
Financial Information




Management’s Responsibility for Financial Reporting
The accompanying financial statements are the responsibility of management and have been reviewed and approved
by Senior Management. The financial statements were prepared in accordance with Canadian Public Sector
Accounting Standards, and of necessity, include some amounts that are based on estimates and judgement.

To discharge its responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of financial reporting, management maintains a system of
internal accounting controls comprising written policies, standards and procedures, a formal authorization structure,
and satisfactory processes for reviewing internal controls. This system provides management with reasonable
assurance that transactions are in accordance with governing legislation and are properly authorized, reliable financial
records are maintained, and assets are adequately safeguarded.

The Health Quality Council of Alberta’s Board of Directors carries out their responsibility for the financial statements
through the Audit and Finance Committee. The Committee meets with management and the Auditor General of
Alberta to review financial matters, and recommends the financial statements to the Health Quality Council of Alberta
Board of Directors for approval upon finalization of the audit. The Auditor General of Alberta has open and complete
access to the Audit and Finance Committee.

The Auditor General of Alberta provides an independent audit of the financial statements. His examination is
conducted in accordance with Canadian Generally Accepted Auditing Standards and includes tests and procedures,
which allow him to report on the fairness of the financial statements prepared by management.

On behalf of the Health Quality Council of Alberta.



[Original signed by Andrew Neuner]                                        [Original signed by Jessica Wing]

Chief Executive Officer                                                   Director, Financial Services
Andrew Neuner                                                             Jessica Wing
May 28, 2020                                                              May 28, 2020




140                                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                          Financial Information




Independent Auditor’s Report
To the Board of Directors of the Health Quality Council of Alberta

Report on the Financial Statements

Opinion
I have audited the financial statements of the Health Quality Council of Alberta, which comprise the
statement of financial position as at March 31, 2020, and the statements of operations, change in net
financial assets, and cash flows for the year then ended, and notes to the financial statements, including a
summary of significant accounting policies.
In my opinion, the accompanying financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial
position of the Health Quality Council of Alberta as at March 31, 2020, and the results of its operations, its
changes in net financial assets, and its cash flows for the year then ended in accordance with Canadian
public sector accounting standards.

Basis for opinion
I conducted my audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards. My
responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor's Responsibilities for the
Audit of the Financial Statements section of my report. I am independent of the Health Quality
Council of Alberta in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to my audit of the
financial statements in Canada, and I have fulfilled my other ethical responsibilities in accordance
with these requirements. I believe that the audit evidence I have obtained is sufficient and
appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion.

Other information
Management is responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the
information included in the Annual Report, but does not include the financial statements and my
auditor’s report thereon. The Annual Report is expected to be made available to me after the date of
this auditor’s report.
My opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and I do not express
any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with my audit of the financial statements, my responsibility is to read the other
information identified above and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially
inconsistent with the financial statements or my knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise
appears to be materially misstated.
If, based on the work I will perform on this other information, I conclude that there is a material
misstatement of this other information, I am required to communicate the matter to those charged
with governance.

Responsibilities of management and those charged with governance for the financial statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements in
accordance with Canadian public sector accounting standards, and for such internal control as
management determines is necessary to enable the preparation of the financial statements that are
free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements, management is responsible for assessing the Health Quality
Council of Alberta’s ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to
going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless an intention exists to liquidate
or to cease operations, or there is no realistic alternative but to do so.



Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                           141
Financial Information



Those charged with governance are responsible for overseeing the Health Quality Council of
Alberta’s financial reporting process.

Auditor's responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements
My objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole
are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor's report
that includes my opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee
that an audit conducted in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards will
always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error
and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to
influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
As part of an audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards, I exercise
professional judgment and maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit. I also:
     Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due
      to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain
      audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for my opinion. The risk of not
      detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from
      error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the
      override of internal control.
     Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit
      procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an
      opinion on the effectiveness of the Health Quality Council of Alberta’s internal control.
     Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting
      estimates and related disclosures made by management.
     Conclude on the appropriateness of management’s use of the going concern basis of accounting
      and, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to
      events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Health Quality Council of Alberta’s
      ability to continue as a going concern. If I conclude that a material uncertainty exists, I am
      required to draw attention in my auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the financial
      statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify my opinion. My conclusions are
      based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of my auditor’s report. However, future
      events or conditions may cause the Health Quality Council of Alberta to cease to continue as a
      going concern.
     Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements, including
      the disclosures, and whether the financial statements represent the underlying transactions and
      events in a manner that achieves fair presentation.
I communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the planned
scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in
internal control that I identify during my audit.




[Original signed by W. Doug Wylie FCPA, FCMA, ICD.D]
Auditor General

May 28, 2020
Edmonton, Alberta




142                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                     Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta

Statement of Operations
Year ended March 31, 2020
(thousands of dollars)

                                                                   2020                     2019

                                                        Budget            Actual           Actual
                                                        (Note 4)
Revenues
   Government transfers

      Alberta Health - operating grant              $     6,585       $    6,560      $        7,222

   Investment income                                        20                 27                  22

   Other revenue                                              -                25                  70

                                                          6,605            6,612               7,314



Expenses

   Administration                                         2,072            2,111               1,893

   Health system analytics                                2,563            2,596               2,348

   Health system improvement                              1,419            1,425               1,520

   Communication                                           902                 946               993

   Ministerial assessment/study                            220                 79                719

                                                          7,176            7,157               7,473



Annual operating (deficit)                                (571)             (545)              (159)

Accumulated operating surplus, beginning of year          1,767            1,767               1,926

Accumulated operating surplus, end of year          $     1,196       $    1,222      $        1,767




The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                        143
Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta

Statement of Financial Position
As at March 31, 2020
(thousands of dollars)

                                                                          2020               2019
Financial Assets
   Cash                                                               $   1,017         $          1,462
   Accounts receivable                                                         30                     60
                                                                          1,047                    1,522
Liabilities
   Accounts payable and accrued liabilities (Note 6)                           686                   757
   Employee future benefits (Note 7)                                           134                   121
   Deferred revenue (Note 8)                                                     -                      -
   Deferred lease inducements (Note 9)                                         111                   147
                                                                               931                 1,025


Net Financial Assets                                                           116                   497


Non-Financial Assets
   Tangible capital assets (Note 10)                                           936                 1,188
   Prepaid expenses                                                            170                    82
                                                                          1,106                    1,270


Net Assets                                                                1,222                    1,767


Net Assets
Accumulated operating surplus (Note 12)                               $   1,222         $          1,767




Contractual obligations (Note 11)


The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




144                                                                       Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                       Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta

Statement of Change in Net Financial Assets
Year ended March 31, 2020
(thousands of dollars)

                                                                   2020                       2019
                                                         Budget               Actual          Actual
Annual operating (deficit)                           $     (571)          $    (545)      $     (159)


Acquisition of tangible capital assets (Note 10)            (74)                (44)            (374)
Amortization and write down of tangible capital
assets (Note 10)                                            293                 296               253


(Increase) in prepaid expenses                                 -                (88)             (15)
(Decrease) in net financial assets in the year             (352)               (381)            (295)
Net financial assets, beginning of year                     497                 497               792
Net financial assets, end of year                    $      145           $     116       $       497




The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                        145
Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta

Statement of Cash Flows
Year ended March 31, 2020
(thousands of dollars)

                                                                                        2020             2019
  Operating Transactions
      Annual operating (deficit)                                                     $ (545)         $    (159)
      Non-cash items:
       Amortization and write down of tangible capital assets (Note 10)                    296             253
       Amortization of deferred lease inducements (Note 9)                                 (36)            (37)
       Increase in employee future benefits (Note 7)                                        13               27
                                                                                         (272)               84
       Decrease (Increase) in accounts receivable                                           30             (11)
       (Increase) in prepaid expenses                                                      (88)            (15)
       (Decrease) Increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities (Note 6)            (71)            130
       (Decrease) in deferred revenue                                                          -            (6)
       Increase in deferred lease inducements (Note 9)                                         -             86
      Cash (used) provided by operating transactions                                     (401)             268


  Capital Transactions
      Acquisition of tangible capital assets (Note 10)                                     (44)           (374)
      Cash (applied to) capital transactions                                               (44)           (374)


  (Decrease) in cash                                                                     (445)            (106)


  Cash at beginning of year                                                              1,462           1,568
  Cash at end of year                                                                $ 1,017         $   1,462




  The accompanying notes and schedules are part of these financial statements.




146                                                                               Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                       Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta

Notes to the Financial Statements
Year ended March 31, 2020
(thousands of dollars)

Note 1            AUTHORITY
                  The Health Quality Council of Alberta (HQCA) is a government not-for-profit organization formed
                  under the Health Quality Council of Alberta Act.

                  Pursuant to the Act, the HQCA has a mandate to promote and improve patient safety and health
                  service quality on a province-wide basis.

                  The HQCA is exempt from income taxes under the Income Tax Act.

Note 2            SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND REPORTING
                  PRACTICES
                  These financial statements are prepared in accordance with Canadian public sector accounting
                  standards (PSAS).

                  (a)    Reporting Entity
                  The financial statements reflect the assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses of the HQCA.

                  (b) Basis of Financial Reporting
                  Revenues
                  All revenues are reported on the accrual basis of accounting. Cash received for which services have
                  not been provided by year end is recognized as deferred revenue.

                  Government transfers
                  Transfers from all governments are referred to as government transfers.

                  Government transfers and the associated externally restricted investment income are recognized as
                  deferred revenue if the eligibility criteria for use of the transfer, or the stipulations together with the
                  HQCA’s actions and communications as to the use of the transfer, create a liability. These transfers
                  are recognized as revenue as the stipulations are met and, when applicable, the HQCA complies
                  with its communicated use of these transfers.

                  All other government transfers, without stipulations for the use of the transfer, are recognized as
                  revenue when the transfer is authorized and the HQCA meets the eligibility criteria (if any).

                  Expenses
                  Expenses are reported on an accrual basis. The cost of all goods consumed and services received
                  during the year are expensed.

                  Grants and transfers are recognized as expenses when the transfer is authorized and eligibility
                  criteria have been met by the recipient.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                         147
Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta

Notes to the Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)
      b




Note 2            SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND REPORTING
                  PRACTICES (CONT’D)

                  (b) Basis of Financial Reporting (Cont’d)
                  Valuation of Financial Assets and Liabilities
                  The HQCA’s financial assets and liabilities are generally measured as follows:

                        Financial Statement Component                Measurement

                        Cash                                         Cost

                        Accounts receivable                          Lower of cost or net recoverable value

                        Accounts payable and accrued liabilities     Cost

                  The HQCA does not hold equities traded in an active market, nor engage in derivative contracts or
                  foreign currency transactions. The HQCA is not exposed to remeasurement gains or losses and,
                  consequently, a statement of remeasurement gains and losses is not presented.

                  Financial Assets
                  Financial assets are assets that could be used to discharge existing liabilities or finance future
                  operations and are not for consumption in the normal course of operations.

                  Financial assets are the HQCA’s financial claims on external organizations and individuals at the
                  year end.

                  Cash
                  Cash comprises cash on hand and demand deposits.

                  Accounts Receivable
                  Accounts receivable are recognized at the lower of cost or net recoverable value. A valuation
                  allowance is recognized when recovery is uncertain.

                  Liabilities
                  Liabilities represent present obligations of the HQCA to external organizations and individuals arising
                  from past transactions or events occurring before the year end, the settlement of which is expected
                  to result in the future sacrifice of economic benefits. They are recognized when there is an
                  appropriate basis of measurement and management can reasonably estimate the amounts.

                  Deferred Lease Inducements
                  Deferred lease inducements represent amounts received for leasehold improvements and the value
                  of a rent-free period. Lease inducements are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis over
                  the term of the related lease and the amortization is recognized as a reduction of rent expense for
                  the year.




148                                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                   Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta

Notes to the Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 2            SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND REPORTING
                  PRACTICES (CONT’D)

                  (b)    Basis of Financial Reporting (Cont’d)
                  Employee Future Benefits
                  The HQCA Board has approved a defined contribution Supplementary Executive Retirement Plan
                  (SERP) for certain members of its executive staff. The SERP supplements the benefit under the
                  HQCA registered plan that is limited by the Income Tax Act (Canada). The HQCA contributes a
                  certain percentage of an eligible employee’s pensionable earnings in excess of the limits of the
                  Income Tax Act (Canada). This plan provides participants with an account balance at retirement
                  based on the contributions made to the plan and investment income earned on the contributions
                  based on investment decisions made by the participants.

                  Non-Financial Assets
                  Non-financial assets are acquired, constructed, or developed assets that do not normally provide
                  resources to discharge existing liabilities, but instead:

                           (a) are normally employed to deliver government services;
                           (b) may be consumed in the normal course of operations; and
                           (c) are not for sale in the normal course of operations.

                  Non-financial assets are limited to tangible capital assets and prepaid expenses.

                  Tangible Capital Assets
                  Tangible capital assets are recognized at cost less amortization, which includes amounts that are
                  directly related to the acquisition, design, construction, development, improvement or betterment of
                  the assets. Cost includes overhead directly attributable to construction and development, as well as
                  interest costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition or construction of the asset.

                  The cost, less residual value, of the tangible capital assets, excluding work-in-progress, is amortized
                  on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives as follows:

                    Computer hardware and software                  5 years

                    Office equipment                                10 years

                    Leasehold improvements                          Over term of lease

                  Tangible capital assets are written down when conditions indicate that they no longer contribute to
                  the HQCA’s ability to provide services, or when the value of future economic benefits associated with
                  the tangible capital assets are less than their book value. The net write-downs are accounted for as
                  expenses in the Statement of Operations.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                     149
Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta

Notes to the Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 2            SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND REPORTING
                  PRACTICES (CONT’D)

                  (b)      Basis of Financial Reporting (Cont’d)
                  Prepaid Expenses
                  Prepaid expenses are recognized at cost and amortized based on the terms of the agreement.

                  Funds and Reserves
                  Certain amounts, as approved by the Board of Directors, are set aside in accumulated operating
                  surplus for future operating and capital purposes. Transfers to/from funds and reserves are an
                  adjustment to the respective fund when approved.

                  Measurement Uncertainty
                  Measurement uncertainty exists when there is a variance between the recognized or disclosed
                  amount and another reasonably possible amount. The amounts recognized for amortization of
                  tangible capital assets are based on estimates of the useful life of the related assets. Actual results
                  could differ from estimates.



Note 3            FUTURE ACCOUNTING CHANGES
                  The Public Sector Accounting Board has approved the following accounting standards:

                       PS 3280 Asset Retirement Obligations (effective April 1, 2021)
                        Effective April 1, 2021, this standard provides guidance on how to account for and report
                        liabilities for retirement of tangible capital assets.

                       PS 3400 Revenue (effective April 1, 2022)
                        This standard provides guidance on how to account for and report on revenue, and specifically, it
                        addresses revenue arising from exchange transactions and unilateral transactions.

                  Management is currently assessing the impact of these standards on the financial statements.




150                                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                        Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta

Notes to the Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)

Note 4            BUDGET
                  The HQCA’s 2019-2020 operating budget with a budgeted deficit of ($571) was approved by the
                  Board of Directors on February 7, 2019 and submitted to the Ministry of Health.

Note 5            FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
                  The HQCA has the following financial instruments: accounts receivable, accounts payable and
                  accrued liabilities.

                  The HQCA has exposure to the following risks from its use of financial instruments: interest rate risk,
                  liquidity risk, other price risk and credit risk.

                  (a) Interest rate risk
                  Interest rate risk is the risk that the rate of return and future cash flows on the HQCA’s short-term
                  investments will fluctuate because of changes in market interest rates. As the HQCA invests in short
                  term deposits of 90 days or less and accounts payable are non-interest bearing, the HQCA is not
                  exposed to significant interest rate risk relating to its financial instruments.

                  (b) Liquidity risk
                  Liquidity risk is the risk that the HQCA will encounter difficulty in meeting obligations associated with
                  financial liabilities. The HQCA enters into transactions to purchase goods and services on credit.
                  Liquidity risk is measured by reviewing the HQCA’s future net cash flows for the possibility of
                  negative net cash flow. The HQCA manages the liquidity risk resulting from its accounts payable
                  obligations by maintaining cash resources and investing in short-term deposits of 90 days or less.

                  (c) Other price risk
                  Other price risk is the risk that the fair value or future cash flows of a financial instrument will
                  fluctuate because of changes in market prices (other than those arising from interest rate risk or
                  foreign currency risk), whether those changes are caused by factors specific to the individual
                  financial instrument or its issuer, or factors affecting all similar financial instruments traded in the
                  market. Price risk is managed by holding short-term deposits for 90 days or less.

                  (d) Credit risk
                  The HQCA is exposed to credit risk from potential non-payment of accounts receivable. During the
                  fiscal year most of the HQCA’s receivables are from provincial agencies; therefore the credit risk is
                  minimized.

Note 6            ACCOUNTS PAYABLE AND ACCRUED LIABILITIES
                  Included in accounts payable and accrued liabilities is $160 (2019 - $0) of funds held on behalf of the
                  partners of PROactive: Partners in Professionalism initiative to cover expenses which the HQCA will
                  incur on their behalf.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                             151
Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta

Notes to the Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)


Note 7            EMPLOYEE FUTURE BENEFITS
                  The HQCA participates in the Local Authorities Pension Plan (LAPP), a multi-employer defined
                  benefit pension plan.

                  The HQCA accounts for this multi-employer pension plan on a defined contribution basis. The HQCA
                  is not responsible for future funding of the plan deficit other than through contribution increases.
                  Pension expense recorded in the financial statements is equivalent to HQCA’s annual contributions
                  of $388 for the year ended March 31, 2020 (2019 - $405).

                  At December 31, 2019, the Local Authorities Pension Plan reported a surplus of $7,913,261 (2018 –
                  surplus of $3,469,347).

                  The fair value of the pension plan is subject to significant market volatility due to the economic crisis
                  stemming from the global pandemic COVID-19 virus. To the extent that the pension plan may not
                  recover market-losses during the remainder of 2020, the funded status of the plan would experience
                  a correlated decline. The financial market impact of the outbreak has been rapidly evolving, which
                  precludes a reasonable estimate of the impact.

                  The Supplementary Executive Retirement Plan (SERP) payable at year ended March 31, 2020 is
                  $134 (2019 - $121). The current year contribution related to this plan is $13 (2019 - $27).

Note 8            DEFERRED REVENUE
                  Deferred revenue represents unspent externally restricted resources. Changes in the balance are as
                  follows:

                                                                                    2020           2019
                              Balance, beginning of the year                  $        -      $       6
                                   Amount received during the year                     -               -
                                   Less: Amount recognized as revenue                  -             (6)
                              Balance, end of the year                        $        -      $        -


Note 9            DEFERRED LEASE INDUCEMENTS
                  The HQCA received a lease inducement in the form of free rent relating to a lease renewal of the
                  premises effective 2018. This amount will be amortized on a straight-line basis over the term of the
                  related lease and the amortization is recognized as a reduction of rent expense.


                                                                           2020            2019

                        Lease inducements - rent free periods          $     209       $    209

                        Less accumulated amortization                        (98)           (62)

                                                                       $     111       $    147




152                                                                                        Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                             Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta

Notes to the Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)


Note 10            TANGIBLE CAPITAL ASSETS
                                                                2020                                     2019
                                                   Computer
                                     Office       Hardware &      Leasehold
                                   Equipment       Software     improvements         Total               Total


 Estimated useful life                 10 years       5 years       5-10 years


 Historical Cost
 Beginning of year                 $      401     $     813     $       1,013    $   2,227        $     1,880
 Additions                                   -           44                  -         44                 374
 Disposals, including write-
 downs                                       -          (38)                 -        (38)               (27)
                                          401           819             1,013        2,233              2,227


 Accumulated Amortization
 Beginning of year                        217           300               522        1,039                813
 Amortization expense                      32           139               123         294                 253
 Effect of disposals, including
 write-downs                                 -          (36)                 -        (36)               (27)
                                          249           403               645        1,297              1,039


 Net book value at March 31,
 2020                              $      152     $     416     $         368    $    936




 Net book value at March 31,
 2019                              $      184     $     513     $         491                     $     1,188




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                153
Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta

Notes to the Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)


Note 11           CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
                  Contractual obligations are obligations of the HQCA to others that will become liabilities in the future
                  when the terms of those contracts or agreements are met.

                  Estimated payment requirements for each of the next three years and thereafter are as follows:

                                              Year ended       Total lease
                                               March 31        payments

                                             2020 - 21         $     475
                                             2021 - 22               479
                                             2022 - 23               479
                                             Thereafter                 -
                                                               $    1,433

Note 12           ACCUMULATED OPERATING SURPLUS
                  Accumulated operating surplus is comprised of the following:

                                                                    2020                                         2019

                                    Investment in
                                      Tangible         Internally      Unrestricted
                                        Capital        Restricted        Surplus
                                       Assets(a)       Surplus(b)        (Deficit)            Total             Total




 Balance, April 1, 2019             $    1,186        $     581         $         -      $     1,767        $     1,926

 Annual operating (deficit)                   -                -             (545)              (545)             (159)

 Net investments in capital
 assets                                   (250)                -               250                    -                 -

 Transfers, prior year restricted             -           (581)                581                    -                 -

 Transfers, current year
 restricted                                   -             286              (286)                    -                 -

 Balance, March 31, 2020            $      936        $     286         $         -      $     1,222        $     1,767



 (a)    Net assets equal to net book value of internally funded tangible capital assets are restricted as these net
        assets are not available for any other purpose.



154                                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                   Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta

Notes to the Financial Statements
(thousands of dollars)


Note 12           ACCUMULATED OPERATING SURPLUS (CONT’D)

 (b)    The internally restricted surplus represents amounts set aside by the Board for future purposes. Those
        amounts are not available for other purposes without the approval of the Board. Internally restricted surplus
        based on the business plan is summarized as follows:

                                                                      2020             2019

                 Experience surveys                            $       218       $          -

                 FOCUS on Healthcare                                     50                 -

                 Ministerial assessments and studies                     18                 -

                 Measure to improve                                       -              240

                 Monitor the health system                                -               37

                 Engage with the public                                   -              304

                                                               $       286       $       581


Note 13           COMPARATIVE FIGURES
                  Certain 2019 figures have been reclassified to conform to the 2020 presentation.

Note 14           APPROVAL OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
                  The financial statements were approved by the HQCA Board of Directors on May 28, 2020.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                    155
Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta

Schedule 1 – Expenses – Detailed By Object
Year ended March 31
(thousands of dollars)

                                                                    2020                              2019

                                                        Budget                 Actual                Actual



Salaries and benefits                               $       3,819          $      3,979        $         4,207

Supplies, services and other                                3,064                 2,884                  3,013

Amortization of tangible capital assets (Note 10)            293                    294                      253

                                                    $       7,176          $      7,157        $         7,473




156                                                                               Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                 Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta
Schedule 2 – Salary and Benefits Disclosures
Year ended March 31
(thousands of dollars)

                                                                     2020                                    2019

                                                Base                      Other Non-
                                                           Other Cash       Cash
                                              Salary (1)   Benefits (2)   Benefits (3)       Total           Total



 Board of Directors-Chair                 $            -   $       19       $       -    $       19      $      13

 Board of Directors-Members                            -           54               -            54             50

 Chief Executive Officer                            249             6              43           298            453

 Executive Director                                 184              -             34           218            219

                                          $         433    $       79       $      77    $      589      $     735




 (1) Base salary includes pensionable base pay.

 (2) Other cash benefits include honoraria for board members and vehicle allowance, flexible spending allowance
     and vacation payouts to employees. There were no bonuses paid in 2019/2020.

 (3) Other non-cash benefits include: employer’s portion of all employee benefits and contributions or payments
     made on behalf of employees, including pension, Supplementary Executive Retirement Plan, health care
     benefits, dental coverage, vision coverage, out of country medical benefits, group life insurance, accidental
     disability and dismemberment insurance, employee assistance program, Canadian Pension Plan, Employment
     Insurance and fair market value parking.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                     157
Financial Information



Health Quality Council of Alberta

Schedule 3 – Related Party Transactions
Year ended March 31
(thousands of dollars)

Related parties are those entities consolidated or accounted for on a modified equity basis in the Government of
Alberta’s Consolidated Financial Statements. Related parties also include key management personnel and close
family members of those individuals in the HQCA. The HQCA and its employees paid or collected certain taxes and
fees set by regulation for premiums, licenses and other charges. These amounts were incurred in the normal course
of business, reflect charges applicable to all users, and have been excluded from this schedule.

The HQCA had the following transactions with related parties recorded in the Statement of Operations and the
Statement of Financial Position at the amount of consideration agreed upon between the related parties.

                                                                   2020                 2019



                   Revenues

                        Grants                               $         6,560      $       7,222

                        Other                                              6                 33

                                                             $         6,566      $       7,255

                   Expenses

                        Other services                       $            114     $         301



                   Receivable from related parties           $             1      $            -



                   Payable to related parties                $             29     $          19




158                                                                                   Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                                                             Financial Information




Other Financial Information


Table of Contents
         Department of Health .......................................................................................................................160
         Ministry of Health ...............................................................................................................................166




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                                                                 159
Financial Information



Department of Health

Statement of Credit or Recovery (unaudited)
Year ended March 31, 2020
(in thousands)

                                                                          2020

                                                       Actual                       Total Revenue
                                                      Revenue           Unearned     Received /        (Shortfall) /
                                     Authorized      Recognized         Revenue      Receivable          Excess

Support Programs
   Other Support Programs (a)       $      1,000    $        -      $         -      $         -      $      (1,000)
                                    $      1,000    $        -      $         -      $         -      $      (1,000)

(a) The Department receives funding from Health Canada to enhance existing health services to persons with chronic
    Hepatitis C virus infection.




160                                                                                  Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                             Financial Information



Department of Health

Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited)
Year ended March 31, 2020
(in thousands)


                                                                                            Adjusted                       Unexpended
Expense Vote by Program                        Voted         Supplementary Adjustments       Voted          Voted            / (Over
                                                       (1)                      (2)                                  (3)
Operating Expense                         Estimate             Estimate                     Estimate       Actuals          Expended)


1    Ministry Support Services
1.1 Minister's Office                     $        1,195 $                - $         - $        1,195 $        1,184 $                11
1.2 Associate Minister's Office                     395                   -           -           395                380               15
1.3 Deputy Minister's Office                       1,553                  -           -          1,553          1,370              183
1.4 Strategic Corporate Support                  40,068                   -           -        40,068          43,028           (2,960)
1.5 Policy Development
       and Strategic Support                     16,667                   -           -        16,667          13,678            2,989
1.6 Health Advocates' Office                       1,675                  -           -          1,675          1,162              513
                                                 61,553                   -           -        61,553          60,802              751


2   Alberta Health Services
2.1 Continuing Care                            1,123,000                  -           -      1,123,000      1,123,000                   -
2.2 Community Care                             1,254,000                  -           -      1,254,000      1,254,000                   -
2.3 Home Care                                   688,000                   -           -       688,000        688,000                    -
2.4 Acute Care                                 3,680,000                  -           -      3,680,000      3,680,000                   -
2.5 Ambulance Services                          465,000                   -           -       465,000        465,000                    -
2.6 Diagnostic and Therapeutic Services        2,373,000                  -           -      2,373,000      2,373,000                   -
2.7 Population and Public Health                330,000                   -           -       330,000        330,000                    -
2.8 Health Workforce
       Education and Research                    81,000                   -           -        81,000          81,000                   -
2.9 Information Technology                      484,000                   -           -       484,000        484,000                    -
2.10 Support Services                          1,634,000                  -           -      1,634,000      1,634,000                   -
2.11 Administration                             488,000                   -           -       488,000        488,000                    -
                                              12,600,000                  -           -     12,600,000     12,600,000                   -

3    Physician Compensation and Development
3.1 Program Support                                7,529                  -           -          7,529          8,303             (774)
3.2 Physician Remuneration                     4,536,470                  -           -      4,536,470      4,560,681          (24,211)
3.3 Physician Development                       174,851                   -           -       174,851        174,824                   27
3.4 Physician Benefits                          291,132                   -           -       291,132        292,521            (1,389)
                                               5,009,982                  -           -      5,009,982      5,036,329          (26,347)




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                                  161
Financial Information



Department of Health

Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited) (continued)
Year ended March 31, 2020
(in thousands)


                                                                                                Adjusted                  Unexpended
Expense Vote by Program                               Voted      Supplementary Adjustments       Voted        Voted         / (Over
Operating Expense                                 Estimate (1)     Estimate         (2)
                                                                                                Estimate    Actuals (3)    Expended)


4     Drugs and Supplemental Health Benefits
4.1 Program Support                               $    47,964 $               - $         - $     47,964 $     47,987 $           (23)
4.2 Outpatient Cancer Therapy Drugs                   226,700                 -           -      226,700      226,700                  -
4.3 Outpatient Specialized High Cost Drugs            119,715                 -           -      119,715      119,715                  -
4.4 Seniors Drug Benefits                             572,362                 -           -      572,362      608,233        (35,871)
4.5 Seniors Dental, Optical
        and Supplemental Health Benefits              138,746                 -           -      138,746      134,748          3,998
4.6 Non-Group Drug Benefits                           218,417                 -           -      218,417      213,964          4,453
4.7 Non-Group Supplemental Health Benefits               900                  -           -          900           834                66
4.8 Assured Income for
        the Severely Handicapped Health Benefit       241,780                 -           -      241,780      231,347         10,433
4.9 Child Health Benefit                               31,352                 -           -       31,352       30,545            807
4.10 Adult Health Benefit                             225,033                 -           -      225,033      231,582          (6,549)
4.11 Alberta Aids to Daily Living                     165,279                 -           -      165,279      170,166          (4,887)
4.12 Pharmaceutical Innovation and Management         103,089                 -           -      103,089      104,450          (1,361)
                                                   2,091,337                  -           -     2,091,337   2,120,271        (28,934)
5     Addiction and Mental Health
5.1 Program Support                                     3,293                 -           -         3,293        3,240                53
5.2 Addiction and Mental Health                        93,228                 -           -       93,228       70,925         22,303
                                                       96,521                 -           -       96,521       74,165         22,356
6     Primary Health Care
6.1 Program Support                                     3,096                 -           -         3,096        2,919           177
6.2 Primary Health Care                               238,044                 -           -      238,044      241,753          (3,709)
                                                      241,140                 -           -      241,140      244,672          (3,532)
7 Population and Public Health
7.1 Program Support                                    13,658                 -           -       13,658       11,448          2,210
7.2 Immunization Support                                2,620                 -           -         2,620        1,521         1,099
7.3 Community-Based Health Services                    60,334                 -           -       60,334       57,149          3,185
7.4 Research and Support Programs                      15,362                 -           -       15,362       13,007          2,355
7.5 Palliative Care                                     5,000                 -           -        5,000              -        5,000
                                                       96,974                 -           -       96,974       83,125         13,849


8     Allied Health Services                          116,627                 -           -      116,627      123,233          (6,606)

9     Human Tissue and Blood Services                 175,000                 -           -      175,000      158,719         16,281



162                                                                                              Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                                                        Financial Information



Department of Health

Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited) (continued)
Year ended March 31, 2020
(in thousands)
                                                                                                      Adjusted                         Unexpended
Expense Vote by Program                             Voted            Supplementary Adjustments         Voted           Voted                / (Over
Operating Expense                                 Estimate (1)         Estimate           (2)
                                                                                                      Estimate       Actuals (3)           Expended)


10 Support Programs
10.1 Program Support                          $          8,913 $                  - $           - $        8,913 $          8,168 $               745
10.2 Health Quality Council of Alberta                   7,559                    -             -          7,559            6,560                 999
10.3 Protection for Persons in Care                      1,900                    -             -          1,900            2,026                (126)
10.4 Monitoring, Investigations
      and Licensing                                      7,720                    -             -          7,720           7,227                  493
10.5 Health System Projects                              4,000                    -             -          4,000           2,160                1,840
                                                        30,092                    -             -         30,092          26,141                3,951
11 Out-of-Province Health Care Services
11.1 Program Support                                    6,872                     -             -         6,872            6,521                   351
11.2 Out-of-Province Health Care Services             144,304                     -             -       144,304          148,092                (3,788)
                                                      151,176                     -             -       151,176          154,613                (3,437)
12 Information Technology
12.1 Program Support                                     6,943                    -             -          6,943           6,437                  506
12.2 Development and Operations                         71,130                    -             -         71,130          59,526               11,604
                                                        78,073                    -             -         78,073          65,963               12,110

13      Cancer Research
          and Prevention Investment                     25,000                    -             -         25,000          14,799               10,201

Capital Grants
14 Infrastructure Support
14.1 Continuing Care Beds                               28,326                    -             -         28,326            5,313              23,013
                                                        28,326                    -             -         28,326            5,313              23,013
Capital Payments to Related Parties
9       Human Tissue and Blood Services                          -                -             -                -          1,000               (1,000)
14 Infrastructure Support
14.1 Continuing Care Beds                                4,700                    -             -          4,700            4,414                 286
14.2 External Information Systems
      Development                                        5,748                    -             -          5,748            3,005               2,743
14.3 Equipment for Cancer Corridor Projects              3,469                    -             -          3,469                -               3,469
14.4 Medical Equipment Replacement
        and Upgrade Program                            30,000                     -             -        30,000           30,000                       -
14.5 Clinical Information System                      136,751                     -             -       136,751          136,751                       -
                                                      180,668                     -             -       180,668          175,170                5,498

Credit or Recovery (Shortfall)                                   -                -       (1,000)         (1,000)                  -            (1,000)


Total                                         $ 20,982,469 $                  -       $   (1,000) $ 20,981,469 $ 20,943,315 $                  38,154
Lapse                                                                                                                                  $       38,154




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                                                      163
Financial Information



Department of Health

Lapse/Encumbrance (unaudited) (continued)
Year ended March 31, 2020
(in thousands)
                                                                                                      Adjusted                 Unexpended
                                                        Voted      Supplementary Adjustments           Voted      Voted          / (Over
                                                      Estimate (1)   Estimate         (2)
                                                                                                      Estimate   Actuals (3)       Expended)


Capital Investment Vote by Program
Department Capital Acquisitions
7    Population and Public Health
7.2 Immunization Support                              $      -     $          -     $       -     $         -    $       24    $         (24)
12   Information Technology
12.2 Development and Operations                           22,230              -             -           22,230       20,606            1,624
Total                                                 $   22,230 $            -     $       -     $     22,230 $     20,630 $          1,600
Lapse                                                                                                                          $       1,600

Financial Transactions Vote by Program
Inventory Acquisition
4.3 Outpatient Specialized High Cost Drugs            $    9,000 $            -     $       -     $      9,000 $      5,892 $          3,108
7       Population and Public Health
7.2     Immunization Support                              58,819              -             -           58,819       54,013            4,806
Total                                                 $   67,819 $            -     $       -     $     67,819 $     59,905 $          7,914
Lapse                                                                                                                          $       7,914

Contingency and Disaster and Emergency Assistance
15      COVID-19 Pandemic Response                    $          - $          -     $   33,594 $        33,594 $     27,490 $          6,104
Total                                                 $          - $              - $   33,594 $        33,594 $     27,490 $          6,104
Lapse                                                                                                                          $       6,104

      (1) As per "Expense Vote by Program", "Capital Investment Vote by Program" and "Financial Transactions Vote by Program" page 118

        to 120 of 2019-2020 Government Estimates.
      (2) Adjustments include encumbrances, capital carry over amounts, transfers between votes and credit or recovery increases approved

        by Treasury Board Committee and credit or recovery shortfalls. An encumbrance is incurred when, on a vote by vote basis, the total
        of actual disbursements in the prior year exceed the total adjusted estimate.

        Adjustments also include supply vote transfers for "Contingency and Disaster and Emergency Assistance" as approved by the
        Lieutenant Governor in Council under the direction of the Minister of Finance. The Contingency and Disaster and Emergency
        Assistance supply vote consists of a provisional funding authority transferable to any ministry. Upon approval by the Lieutenant
        Governor in Council, the President of Treasury Board and Minister of Finance may either spend or transfer all or a portion of this
        supply vote to another minister for public emergencies, disasters or unanticipated costs. As per Order in Council 094/2020 approved
        on March 25, 2020, $33,594 was transferred from the Department of Treasury Board and Finance to the Department of Health
        towards pandemic response.

      (3) Actuals exclude non-voted amounts such as amortization, inventory consumption, and valuation adjustments.




164                                                                                                      Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                              Financial Information



Department of Health

Statement of Remissions, Compromises and Write-offs (unaudited)
Year ended March 31, 2020
(in thousands)



                                                                                    2020                 2019
 Write-Offs
               Medical Claim Recoveries                                         $     2,914          $     2,621
               Pharmaceuticals and Health Benefits                                      916                   85
               Other Receivables                                                        456                  458
 Total Write-offs (1)                                                           $     4,286          $     3,164
 (1)
       There were no remissions or compromises during the year.

 The above statement has been prepared pursuant to Section 23 of the Financial Administration Act. The
 statement includes all remissions, compromises and write-offs made or approved during the fiscal year.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                165
Financial Information



Ministry of Health
Year ended March 31, 2020
(in thousands)


Payments Based on Agreements (unaudited)
The Ministry entered into agreements, under the Alberta Health Care Insurance Plan, with other
Provincial and Territorial Governments to provide health services on their behalf. The Ministry pays
service providers for services rendered under the agreements and recovers the amount paid from the
program sponsors. Service providers include Alberta Health Services and physicians. Costs based on
these agreements are incurred by the Ministry under authority in section 25 of the Financial
Administration Act.

Amounts paid based on agreements with program sponsors are as follows:


                                                                   2020                      2019
      Other Provincial and Territorial Governments            $        323,290        $         310,183

Accounts receivable includes $33,551 (2019 - $46,723).




Trust Funds under Administration (unaudited)

Trust funds under administration are funds consisting of public money over which the Legislature has no
power of appropriation. Because the Ministry has no equity in the funds and administers them for the
purposes of various trusts, they are not included in the consolidated financial statements.

At March 31, 2020, the Health Benefit Trust of Alberta reported fund balance of $110,699 (2019 -
$139,307). At March 31, 2020, balance of trust funds held for others is $1,490 (2019 - $1,552).

The Ministry and a third party trustee administer the SERP in accordance with a retirement compensation
arrangement trust agreement. At March 31, 2020, there are $29,181 in plan assets (2019 - $32,674).




166                                                                          Health | Annual Report 2019–2020
                                                                                              Financial Information




Annual Report Extracts and Other Statutory Reports
Public Interest Disclosure (Whistleblower Protection) Act

Section 32 of the Public Interest Disclosure (Whistleblower Protection) Act reads:

32(1)    Every chief officer must prepare a report annually on all disclosures that have been made to the
         designated officer of the department, public entity or office of the Legislature for which the chief
         officer is responsible.

   (2)   The report under subsection (1) must include the following information:

         (a) the number of disclosures received by the designated officer, the number of disclosures acted on
             and the number of disclosures not acted on by the designated officer;

         (b) the number of investigations commenced by the designated officer as a result of disclosures;

         (c) in the case of an investigation that results in a finding of wrongdoing, a description of the
             wrongdoing and any recommendations made or corrective measures taken in relation to the
             wrongdoing or the reasons why no corrective measure was taken.

   (3)   The report under subsection (1) must be included in the annual report of the department, public
         entity or office of the Legislature if the annual report is made publicly available.




                                   Public Interest Disclosure Report
 The following report pertains to the Department of Health (April 1, 2019 to March 31, 2020):

          1 – Disclosure:
               1 disclosure acted on
               0 disclosures not acted on

          0 – Investigations

          0 – Investigations resulting in a finding of wrongdoing

 Note: Alberta Health Services and the Health Quality Council of Alberta are considered separate
 entities for the purposes of the Act, and therefore have individual reporting obligations.




Health | Annual Report 2019–2020                                                                                167
