PHYSICAL PDF PAGE 42,1-indexed
Results Analysis



Licensing and Monitoring in Continuing Care

To strengthen accountability, transparency, and oversight in Alberta’s continuing care system, the
Government of Alberta introduced a new legislative framework:

      •       On April 1, 2024, the Continuing Care Act and associated regulations—Continuing Care
              Regulation and Continuing Care (Ministerial) Regulation—came into effect. This
              legislative update marked a major milestone in transforming Alberta’s continuing care
              system.
      •       The Act enables Alberta Health to enhance licensing, monitoring, and compliance
              processes across all levels of continuing care, including home and community care,
              supportive living, and palliative services. These enhanced oversight mechanisms are
              intended to ensure quality, safety, and equitable access to services.

Additionally, ALA, expected to become operational by fall 2025, will align medical and non-medical
services, expand access to continuing care, and support system accountability through integrated
service delivery and performance monitoring.

The performance metric 2.b, included in the 2024-27 Business Plan, pertains to Continuing Care
which has been transitioned to the Ministry of Seniors, Community and Social Services. Hence, this
data will not be discussed in this report.

Unplanned medical readmissions to hospital within 30 days of discharge

                                              2020-21       2021-22       2022-23        2023-24       2024-25


 Percentage of patients with an
 unplanned medical re-
                                              13.2%         12.9%         12.6%          12.7%          12.7%
 admission within 30 days of
 discharge

Source: Alberta’s Morbidity and Ambulatory Care Abstract Reporting System (MACAR)
Note: The result is for Acute Care data submissions

The above performance measure estimates the percentage of medical patients with an unplanned
readmission to hospital within 30 days of being discharged. A lower percentage means fewer
patients have been readmitted to hospital within one month of discharge. A high rate of
readmissions increases costs and may mean the health system is not performing as well as it could
be. Although readmission may involve many factors, lower readmission rates may show that
Albertans are supported by discharge planning and continuity of care. Results exclude hospital
admissions for surgery, pregnancy, childbirth, mental health diseases and disorders, palliative care,
and cancer therapy. The desired result is to decrease the percentage of unplanned readmissions to
hospital within 30 days of discharge.

In 2024-25, the percentage of medical patients with an unplanned hospital readmission within 30
days of discharge from hospital was 12.7 per cent, identical to as that of previous years.

2.4       Strengthen and modernize Alberta’s primary health care system in partnership with
          Albertans and Indigenous communities by implementing innovations to ensure access
          to safe, timely and appropriate primary health care services in the community


40                                                                                  Health | Annual Report 2024–2025
