MEASURING UP	
91
Working to Make Life Better by Creating 
and Supporting Jobs
Over the past year, our government focused on extending the economic recovery to all 
Albertans.  We have supported new and developing industries to create good jobs and 
pursued increased market access for Alberta’s energy products positioning the province 
well to achieve economic recovery that is built to last.  In 2017, 90,000 full-time jobs 
were created.  
Getting a Canadian pipeline to Canadian tidewater for Alberta’s world-class energy 
producers to sell our oil at world prices on the global market is a key priority.  We will 
continue to take decisive actions to ensure that the federally-approved Trans Mountain 
Pipeline is built and that the jobs that go with it are realized.  We have, and will 
continue to, fight for jobs in Alberta.
In 2017-18 our government invested in the infrastructure Albertans need.  A 
$65 million capital investment in the Misercordia Community Hospital over four 
years was announced in April 2017.  The $1. 4 billion Calgary Cancer Centre, set to 
open in 2023, is one of the largest construction projects underway in Alberta.  It will 
add approximately 1,500 jobs to the Calgary economy over the next six years.
In September 2017, thousands of Alberta students started the school year in new and 
updated schools.  Our government is committed to meeting the needs of Alberta’s 
student population.  We created approximately 21,600 new student spaces and 
modernized or replaced an additional 15,000 student spaces.  In today’s Alberta, our 
kids deserve a world-class education that prepares them for a great future.
We are building on our strengths by leveraging billions of dollars in new private-sector 
investment to create thousands of jobs in a diversified energy industry.  In addition to 
support for the commercialization of partial upgrading, work is underway to ensure 
companies have access to the natural gas liquids they need to grow private investment 
in Alberta-based natural gas processing and to build on the early success of Alberta’s 
Petrochemicals Diversification Program.
Small and medium-sized enterprises are essential to Alberta’s economy, bringing 
exciting new ideas and creating jobs and opportunities for all Albertans.  In 2017-18 
we launched the Alberta Entrepreneurship Incubator program (AEI), a $10 million, 
two-year pilot, designed to offer support for prospective entrepreneurs with innovative 
ideas, recent graduates seeking employment and anyone who has the opportunity 
to create new products or concepts after service in a traditional industry sector.  In 
2017-18, seven regional incubators have received AEI funding to support start-up 
businesses.
Our government remains committed to making life better for Albertans and creating 
good jobs – our choice has been, and continues to be, to build, not cut.  And it’s 
working.  Alberta’s economy is coming out of the worst recession in generations, 
growing faster than any province in Canada.
Outcome 1	
Overview
