
15
2024-25 Final Results | Year-End Report
The 2024-25 Capital Plan reached 
$7.2 billion, an increase of $0.9 billion 
compared to 2023-24 spending. This  
supported both new infrastructure 
development and upgrades to 
existing capital assets during a time of 
exceptional population growth. 
The 2024-25 capital spending followed 
a responsible approach during a period 
of unprecedented growth, balancing 
the province’s needs with prudent fiscal 
management to ensure Alberta remains 
on a sustainable financial path. 
The government prioritized strategic 
investments in the education, health 
and mental health systems, roadways, 
bridges, and other public infrastructure 
to support a growing province.  
Highlights include the completion 
of 12 school projects, roughly 30 
bridge projects, 65 road rehabilitation 
initiatives, 388 housing units, and 
17 health facility projects. The plan 
allocated $1.3 billion to the Capital 
Maintenance and Renewal (CMR) 
program aimed at maintaining public 
infrastructure and delivering programs 
efficiently to prevent costly repairs 
or replacements. 
New projects announced in 2024-25 
included 43 school projects, the Stollery 
Standalone Children’s Hospital, youth 
and adult mental health facilities, the 
NAIT Advanced Skills Centre Planning, 
Olds College - WJ Elliott Expansion and 
Renewal, and Kananaskis Area 
Trails Strategy.
Other significant ongoing projects and 
programs in various stages of planning, 
design and construction include the 
Edmonton and Calgary light rail transit 
(LRT), Red Deer Polytechnic Centre 
for Innovation in Manufacturing - 
Technology Access Centre East Campus 
Expansion, Highway 3 Twinning (Taber 
to Burdett), Highway 11 Twinning (Red 
Deer west to Rocky Mountain House), 
Recovery Communities, the Affordable 
Housing Partnership Program, and 87 
school projects. 
The Aboriginal Business Investment 
Fund has operated for 10 years. Since 
2014, it has provided $58 million for 
more than 105 community-owned 
businesses, helping to create nearly 
1,000 permanent jobs for Indigenous 
people in Alberta. 
In 2024-25, $10 million was provided 
for 20 Indigenous community-owned 
projects across the province.
Capital Plan 
Initiatives Highlight
The Capital Plan supported several key 
initiatives in 2024-25.
Economic Development in Rural 
Alberta Plan
The plan guides rural economic growth, 
reflecting on innovation, diversification, 
and sustainable, long-term economic 
development. 
•	 $19 million for the Irrigation 
Rehabilitation Program which helps 
irrigation districts to update water 
infrastructure and optimize current 
water allocations.
•	 $236 million in grants under the 
Strategic Transportation Infrastructure, 
Water/Wastewater Partnership and 
Water for Life programs to support 
125 projects in rural communities 
across Alberta.
Alberta Petrochemicals Incentive 
Program (APIP)
APIP invests in petrochemical projects 
to strengthen and diversify the provincial 
economy by creating jobs, attracting 
investments, and increasing the 
municipal tax base.
•	 $147 million for projects including 
the Inter-Pipeline – Heartland 
Petrochemical Complex and 
Dow Expansion.
•	 In November 2024, the Rocky 
Mountain Clean Fuels opened its 
$173-million synthetic diesel facility 
in Wheatland County. This project 
has created 900 jobs and is the first 
project to be located outside the 
Edmonton region. 
School Construction Accelerator 
Program
The government launched the program 
in fall 2024 to address the growth in the 
number of  K-12 students.  The program 
investment is anticipated to create 
200,000 new and modernized student 
spaces by building up to 90 new schools, 
modernize or replace up to 24 existing 
schools, expand the modular classroom 
program, and expand public 
charter schools.
•	 Currently, 87 school projects are 
underway to support over 60,000 new 
or modernized student spaces. 
Local Government Fiscal 
Framework (LGFF)
In 2024-25, $724 million was provided 
to Alberta municipalities with about 
half (53 per cent) allocated to Calgary 
and Edmonton and the remainder to 
other municipalities in Alberta. The 
LGFF provides funding to Alberta’s 
municipalities to help them undertake 
infrastructure projects aligned with their 
local priorities.
Addressing Mental Health and Addictions
The Alberta Recovery Model provides 
Albertans, struggling with addiction and 
mental health issues, access to holistic 
and long-term treatment. 
•	 A total of 11 recovery communities 
are being established in Alberta. 
Three recovery communities are 
open in Red Deer, Lethbridge and 
Gunn, providing 200 treatment 
beds. There are eight more recovery 
communities in development across 
the province, including five being 
built in partnership with Indigenous 
communities. Once complete, these 
facilities will add more than 500 
additional treatment beds.
•	 Compassionate intervention is an 
approach to help those who pose a  
risk of harm to themselves or others. 
The government initiated work to 
develop facilities to advance this 
approach in 2024-25 and passed the 
Compassionate Intervention Act in 
May 2025.
Annual Infrastructure Report
